REVIEW AND DISCUSSION

1.The distance to the Moon is most accurately measured by laser ranging. Reflectors were left on the surface of the Moon during the Apollo missions; these reflectors “bounce” high-powered laser beams fired at the Moon back to Earth. Since the laser beam travels at the speed of light, timing its travel to the Moon and back will give an accurate measure of its distance.

2.Mercury is one of the brightest objects in the night sky, but, as the closest planet to the Sun, it is never very far from the Sun in the sky. As a result, Mercury is always seen near the horizon just before sunrise or just after sunset. It is rarely high enough above the glare of the Sun to be easily seen.

3.It can be either a morning “star” or evening “star,” depending on where it is in its orbit. For example, when it is west of the Sun from our perspective, it rises just before the Sun in the morning. Ancient astronomers, therefore, thought they were two distinct objects. They made the same mistake with Venus. Careful observation over many centuries, however, revealed the truth.

4.Both the Moon and Mercury have low masses and, therefore, weak gravities and low escape velocities. To make matters worse, both objects experience high daytime temperatures because they are in the inner solar system. At these temperatures, most if not all atmospheric molecules will have velocities in excess of these low escape velocities. Neither object, then, has been able to hold an atmosphere.

5.Early in the Moon’s history, the maria were “seas” of molten lava released from the Moon’s interior by large impacts. Once solidified, the maria became large, flat areas that reminded observers such as Galileo of seas of water.

6.Both Mercury and the Moon are covered in basaltic rock from volcanic activity and are heavily cratered. The crater walls on Mercury are generally not as high as on the Moon, however, and material ejected by striking meteorites landed closer to the impact site. This can be expected on a world whose gravity is stronger than that of the Moon. In addition, Mercury lacks signs of extensive lava flow such as the lunar maria and lunar rilles.

7.The Moon’s orbit is synchronized with its rotation in a 1:1 ratio. The Moon spins one time for each orbit around Earth. When the solar system was still young, the Moon was about two-thirds its current distance from Earth. The tidal effect of the Earth on the Moon distorted the Moon’s shape. Once it solidified, this lopsided shape was frozen. Earth’s tidal forces have aligned the Moon’s high tide side always to face the Earth.

8.Mercury’s orbit is not synchronous with its rotation in a 1:1 ratio, as is the Moon, but in a 3:2 ratio. It rotates 3 times (relative to the stars) for every 2 orbits around the Sun. This was the result of Mercury’s highly eccentric orbit, and allows the same side of Mercury to face the Sun every other orbit at perihelion. It is at perihelion that the tidal forces are the strongest on Mercury, and this locked it into the 3:2 ratio.

9.A scarp is a cliff that formed when Mercury’s surface wrinkled due to cooling. Scarps are often found crossing craters, indicating that they formed after the craters.

10.There is no water or wind erosion and no change due to plate tectonics because none of these exists on the Moon. The primary source of erosion on the Moon is cratering, especially by micrometeors. While meteors do strike the airless Moon frequently, Earth has many more sources of erosion.

11.Both the Clementine and Lunar Prospector missions found evidence of water ice in a crater at the south pole of the Moon. In this location, the Sun never gets high enough to shine into the crater and evaporate the ice.

12.First, the lunar highlands are more heavily cratered than the maria, and thus have been exposed to impacts for longer. Any craters in the maria regions were filled in by lava before the maria solidified. In addition, samples of highland and maria material were brought back by the Apollo program and age-dated. The highland material was shown to be older than the maria material, although the difference was not as great as expected.

13.The extreme temperature variations of Mercury and the Moon are partly due to their lack of an atmosphere. An atmosphere helps a planet to retain heat at night; without one, the surface cools very rapidly. Both bodies also have slow rotation rates (very slow in Mercury), which create long days and nights. The Sun is up for a long period, allowing the rock to heat up. With an equally long night, there is ample time to cool down to a low temperature. By contrast, Earth spins rapidly and has less time to heat up to high temperatures or cool down to low temperatures.

14.Being closer to the Sun and more massive than the Moon, Mercury likely had a great deal more volcanic activity in its very early days. This may be why there are fewer old craters on Mercury than on the Moon. However, the intense internal pressure generated by Mercury’s dense, massive core may have “squeezed” fissures shut on Mercury early on, cutting off volcanic activity. The Moon has a small core at best, and so may have actually had a slightly longer period of volcanic activity. This may be why the Moon has more extensive maria than Mercury, and more volcanic rilles.

15.The favored theory of the formation of the Moon is that a large body, perhaps Mars-sized, struck the Earth a glancing blow. Some of the material thrown off from the crusts and mantles of both bodies could have then coalesced to form the Moon. If the Earth was young but already differentiated enough to have an iron core and rocky mantle, the Moon would have formed primarily out of the low-density mantle material. This isconsistent with the Moon being composed of rock very similar to the Earth’s mantle and explains why the Moon appears to have no iron core. 

16.First, the appearance of Earth’s surface would change due to the Earth’s rotation. With an orbital inclination of just over 5 degrees to the ecliptic, the Earth would appear to move slightly higher and lower in the sky, as seen from a location on the Moon. The Earth would go through “phases” that are the exact opposite of the Moon phases that an observer on Earth would see at the same time. Finally, because the Moon’s orbit is eccentric, the distance between the Earth and Moon changes. At times, the Earth would appear larger.

17.At the terminator line, the Sun is low in the sky, right on the horizon, casting long shadows that let an observer distinguish small surface details. These shadows and the diminished glare allow an observer to see lunar mountains, rilles, and the walls of craters better. If standing on the lunar terminator, the Sun would be on the horizon (or just slightly above it). The same is true for Earth’s terminator—you would be viewing either sunrise or sunset. 

18.The far side of the Moon would be best for astronomical observations. The bright Earth would never interfere with visual observations, and the Moon would shield radio telescopes from Earth’s radio transmissions. The surface of the Moon has no atmosphere, so the resolution of telescopes would be at their maximum, and all forms of radiation could be easily gathered. Bad weather would also not be an obstacle to observing. Finally, the airless sky is always dark, even when the Sun is out—although you would still want to point your telescope well-away from the Sun! 

19.Mercury is the closest planet to the Sun and from our perspective never gets farther than 28 degrees from the Sun. To be overhead at midnight, a planet would have to be 180 degrees from the Sun. Earth can never get between Mercury and the Sun, so this is impossible.

20.When the lunar material differentiated, Earth’s tidal forces played an important role. Denser mantle material settled closer to the Earth; lighter crustal material settled farther away. Therefore, the mantle is somewhat off-center, and the crust on the near side of the Moon is considerably thinner than the crust on the far side. Because of this difference in crust thickness, lava was able to erupt more easily onto the near side, and maria formed more easily. On the far side, the crust was harder to penetrate and maria were generally unable to form. 
