Ch. 6 R&D questions

1. Name objects in the solar system.  Give distinguishing characteristics
   of each.  Include interplanetary space.
   A: there are 8 major planets, 1 star, a number of minor planets such
    	as Pluto and Ceres; almost 150 known moons; thousands of asteroids,
	meteoroids and comets; and interplanetary dust & gas.  The Sun
	dominates the solar system in mass, size and brightness.  It
	is fundamentally different from planets in that in generates
	its light through nuclear fusion.  The major planets come in
	two types: terrestrial and Jovian. The terrestrials are close
	to the Sun and are dense.  The gaseous Jovians are far from the Sun
	and lower in density.  The interplanetary space contains solar
	wind particles and dust (the zodiacal light).

3. Why is it necessary to know the distance to a planet in order
   to determine the planet's mass?
   A: A planets mass is determined by using Kepler's third law to analyze
      the orbital properties of one or more of its moons.  One of these
      properties is the the size of the orbit.  This can be determine
      from the apparent size (in arcseconds) if you know the distance.
      Also, if one assumed an average density for the planet, they could find
      its mass from its apparent size but only if they knew the distance.

5. Name some "disorderly" characteristics of the solar system.
   A: Mercury's orbit is tilted with respect to the other planetary orbits.
      Venus and Uranus have "backward" rotations and/or large axis tilts.
      The orbits of many comets and asteroids are highly eccentric and
      can cross orbits of planets.

7. Which are the jovian planets?  Why are they given that name?
   A: The jovian planets are Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune.  Jovian 
    	means Jupiter-like, and the jovian planets are all large, low in 
	density, and composed primarily of light gases and liquids.

9. Compare the properties of Pluto given in Table 6.1 with the properties
	of the terrestrial and jovian planets presented in Table 6.2.
	What do you conclude regarding the classification of Pluto
	as either a terrestrial or jovian planet?
   A: Pluto is small in lass but low in density and composed mostly
	of ice, so it does not fit in either terrestrial or Jovian
        classification.

11. Comets generally vaporize upon striking Earth's atmosphere.
    How then, do we know their composition?
   A: The ices that make up a comet evaporate as the comet nears
      	the Sun in its highly elongated orbit.  These gases are
	excited by sunlight and emit light that can be analyzed for 
	chemical composition. Comets also release dusty particles 
	that reflect sunlight in different ways, revealing their
	size and composition.

13. How and why do scientists use gravity assists to propel
	spacecraft through the solar system?
   A: Typicall, a direct trip to a planet under long-term rocket 
	thrust would require too much fuel and equipment to be
	practical.  By falling toward a planet and passing close
	behind it, gravity assists allow a spacecraft to "rob"
	a planet of a tiny bit of its orbital energy to boost
	the spacecraft's speed without the need for rockets.
	The process usually takes much longer, but gravity assist
	is overall more practical in most cases.

15.  Why do you think Galileo and Cassini took such circuitous routes
	to Jupiter and Saturn, while Pioneer and Voyager did not?
   A: Both Galileo and Cassini were launched by the Space Shuttle,
	which could not carry the booster rocket needed to move
	these probes out of Earth's orbit and send them directly
	to Jupiter and Saturn.  These space probes had to rely on
	gravity assists to get their speeds high enough to make
	the trip.  Pioneer and Voyager probes were launched from
	the Earth's suface, getting a big initial boost and so
	did not need as much assistance from gravity.

17. What is the key ingredient in the modern condensation theory
	of the solar system's origin that was missing or unknown
	in the nebular theory?
   A: The presence of a temperature decrease with distance from
	the Sun is necessary for the condensation theory to work.
	However, this was probably a given in the initial nebular theory.
	So the real missing key is the presence of interstellar dust 
	mixed with the gas of the early solar nebular.  Dust allows 
        material in the early solar system to "clump" together.
