
AT 7th Ed.
Review and Discussion
Ch. 26 R&D 1-20 (all)

1. What evidence do we have that there is no structure in the
    universe on very large scales?  How large is "very large"?
The Sloan Digital Sky Survey provides evidence that there
are no structures larger than about 300 Mpc.  (So "very large"
is greater than 300 Mpc.)  Other consistent observations are 
pencil-beam surveys, Hubble Deep Fields,
and the distribution of radio galaxies (not in text).

2. What is the Cosmological Principle?
The cosmological principle is made up of two assumptions fundamental to 
cosmology. They are homogeneity and isotropy. At a large enough scale, the 
universe is homogeneous; one part is pretty much like any other part. 
Isotropy means that it looks the same in all directions. The cosmological 
principle tells us there can be no edge to the universe and there is 
no center to it either.

3. What is Olber's paradox?  How is it resolved?
    Olber's paradox was that, if the universe is infinitely large,
old, homogeneous and isotropic, the sky should be as bright as the
surface of the Sun.  It is resolved by accepting that the
universe is not infinitely large and old. Actually, you could
relax the restriction to just "not infinitely old". (You would
still have a dark night sky if the universe was infinitely large.)

4. Explain how an accurate measure of Hubble's constant can lead to
an estimate of the age of the universe.
Hubble’s law is a relationship between velocity of recession of objects in the 
universe and their distance, v = H0d. Since we know that velocity is distance 
divided by time, the Hubble constant, H0, is a measure of one divided by time, 
the time of the expansion of the universe to its present size. It turns out 
that this time gives an age for the universe for the case
of zero acceleration (or deceleration).

5.  We appear to be at the center of the Hubble flow.  Why
doesn't this observation violate the cosmological principle?
    Because we would appear to be at the center of the
Hubble flow at any other region in the universe, thus the
universe appears the same everywhere.

6. Why isn't it correct to say that the expansion of theuniverse
involves galaxies flying outward into empty space?
Since the Hubble flow is an expansion of space itself, galaxies are not 
rushing outward into unoccupied parts of the universe. The universe is 
evenly filled with matter but space is expanding, which gives rise to an 
appearance of galaxies flying outward from us.

7. Where did the Big Bang occur?
    It occurred equally everwhere.

8. How does the cosmological redshift relate to the expansion of the
universe?
     A wave of electromagnetic radiation, as it moves through the universe, 
will experience the same expansion of the space experienced by the universe. 
As the wave travels farther and farther, it expands more and more. By the 
time it is observed, it appears redshifted in proportion to the distance it 
has traveled.

9. What properties of the universe determine whether it will
or will not expand forever?
    One important factor is the total density of matter in 
the universe.  Matter exerts the attractive force of gravity 
and so inhibits expansion.  Another important factor is the
amount (density) of dark energy.  Dark energy contributes to the 
expansion of the universe.

10. What will be the ultimate fate of the universe if it does
expand forever?
(See F. Adam's "The Five Ages of the Universe" for a detailed description.)
Everything continues to expand; eventually no galaxies are even visible 
from Earth. Stars will die out and the universe will experience a 
“heat death.” Everything will get cold and dark.  Even black holes
will gradually evaporate.

11. Is there enough luminous matter to halt the current cosmic
expansion?
    No.  The luminous matter density is only about 1-3% of what
is required to close the universe (assuming no acceleration).

12. Is there enough dark matter to halt the current cosmic
expansion?
    There does not appear to be, although it is difficult to
estimate the amount of dark matter.  Assuming the ratio of 
dark matter to luminous matter in the universe has the same 
density as in clusters of galaxies, the dark matter density appears 
to be only about 25% of what is required to close the universe.  
(luminous+dark ~ 27%)

13. What do observations of distant supernovae tell us about
the expansion of the universe?
	They tell us that the universes' expansion is accelerating.
The type Ia supernovae are standard candles - we can tell
their luminosity by their light curves and so we can figure
out their distances without using the Hubble Law.  Thus, we
measure the Hubble constant at different epoch's of the universe.
It appears that the far away SN are expanding slower than
they are now.

14. What is the cosmological constant, and what does it have to
do with the future of the universe?
The cosmological constant is a factor used to “adjust” how the universe 
expands. Previously thought to be zero, it now is estimated to have a 
value that accounts for the acceleration of the universe that distant 
supernovae suggests is occurring. What it actually is or what causes it is 
not known.

15. Why are measurements of globular cluster ages important
to cosmology?
	Because they provide a high, lower limit for the age of
the universe.  For example, if stellar evolution theory shows
globulars to be 12 Gyrs old, then the universe should be older
than 12 Gyrs.

16. What is the significance of the cosmic microwave background?
	Just after the Big Bang occurred, the universe was filled 
with X-ray and gamma-ray radiation. Since that period, it has traveled 
through the universe, its wavelength expanding

17. Why does the temperature of the microwave background fall
as the universe expands?
The cosmic microwave background radiation is black body radiation. 
The wavelength of all radiation gets increased with the Hubble
expansion.  As the wavelength of peak intensity increases,
the representative temperature must drop, according to Wien’s law.

18. How can we measure Earth's motion with respect to the universe?
	The cosmic microwave background (CMB) has a slightly
different temperature/redshift on one side of the sky than the
other.  This is caused by the motion of the Earth with respect
to the universe by about 300 km/s.

19. Many cultures throughout history have developed their own 
cosmologies.  Do you think the modern scientific cosmology is 
more likely to endure than any other?  Why or why not?

(Opinion) Modern cosmology is based upon specific scientific principles, 
which are testable. It also makes predictions which are also testable. 
This approach may not, in the end, preserve our current cosmological 
theories, but it will lead to a more thorough understanding of the 
universe and a consistent theory of its formation and evolution.
  Also, we can already disprove most of the older theories or else
they are so vague and in such a non-scientific language as to be
un-testable.

20. Do you think it constitutes good science to explain the
universe mainly in terms of dark matter and dark energy,
neither of which is known or understood?
	In general, it isn't good science, but it is the
best scientists can do for the moment.
	Dark matter and dark energy, at this time, are simply names to 
things that appear to exist but for which there is no known explanation. 
Actually, explanations exist but astronomers are uncertain whether any are 
correct! Is it good science? Right now, astronomers seem to be given little 
choice in the matter because observations have contradictions to classical 
theories. Many new things have been discovered, about this there is no doubt. 
Whether dark matter or energy are the correct explanations will be determined 
through more good science and observation.


TorF/MC 1-20
1. F
2. F
3. F
4. F
5. T
6. F
7. F
8. T
9. T
10 T
11. A
12. D
13. B
14. B
15. B
16. D
17. C
18. C
19. D
20. D
