
Homework from
Astronomy Today 
8th Ed.

Homework on stellar evolution
Ch. 18 RD 2,7,13
Ch. 19 RD 2,3,4,10,16,19
Ch. 20 RD 1,3,11,12,13,18  
Ch. 21 RD 6
[Selected answers of unassigned problems are given in brackets.]

Ch. 18
2. What is the composition of interstellar gas?  Of interstellar dust?
	The gas component of the ISM is made mostly of Hydrogen
        which can be in molecular, atomic, and ionized forms.
        Next abundant is Helium followed by <2% of other elements
        like Li, Be, C, N, O, and Fe.  These are called "metals".
        Cooler regions can have molecules like CO, HCN, NH3 and 
        H2O.  Dust is clumps of numerous atoms and molecules.  Dust
        grains often contain Si,Fe,C,Mg and O (bound to Si, Fe, Mg).
        If cold enough, the dust can be coated with ices (H20, CH4, etc).
        
7. What is an emission nebula?
 	An emission nebula is a region of hot glowing gas (mostly 
	hydrogen) surrounding a newly formed star or group of 
	stars.  The atoms of the gas absorb UV light emitted by the 
	bright young stars, and in return, they emit a variety
	of emission lines characteristic of the elements in
	the cloud.  One of the brightest hydrogen emission lines
	is H-alpha, which has a red color.  It is so strong that
	it often overwhelms all other emissions and colors that
	might be seen.

13. What is 21-cm radiation?  With what element is it associated?
    Why is it useful to astronomers?
	21-cm radiation is radio emission at a wavelength of 21 cm.
    It is emitted by neutral hydrogen (HI) when the electron flips
    its spin orientation relative to the proton (the "spin-flip"
    transition).  

---------------------------
Ch. 19  (assigned 2,3,7,11,14)

1.  Briefly describe the basic chain of events leading to the formation
of a star like the Sun.
	The Sun-like star begins as a large interstellar cloud containing
        cold molecular hydrogen.  Gravity makes it start collapsing
        and overdensities within the big cloud make it fragment
        into smaller clouds.  These clouds collapse fairly quickly
        (10^4 yrs) because the grav potential energy goes into 
        breaking H_2 bonds instead of increasing the gas temperature
        and pressure.  After those bonds are broken, collapse goes
        more slowly as it is accompanied by increased temperature
        and pressure.  The protostar gets hot and produces winds which
	blow away the outer parts of the cloud.  Gas and dust remain
        the longest in a protoplanetary disk but eventually gets cleared.
        The center of the protostar finally starts fusion when its
        temperature gets above about 10 million K.  After that there
        is some more slow collapse and heating of the center as the star
        settles onto the main sequence.

2.  What are the roles of heat, rotation and magnetism in the process
    of stellar birth?
    First, heat is the key factor that prohibits star formation because
    when a cloud heats up, the pressure opposes the inward force of gravity.
    Rotation is also important in the process of stellar birth?
	As an interstellar cloud collapses, it must spin faster as 
	it conserves angular momentum.  This can actually
	hinder star formation, as the rotation tends to fling material out
	of the cloud, opposing gravity.  Thus, a rotating cloud needs a 
	stronger gravitational pull and more mass to collapse than a
	cloud that is spinning slowly or not at all.  Rapid spin also
	causes the cloud to flatten into a disk.  Although most of
	the mass is still concentrated in the center, the material in
	the disk could form into planets.
    Magnetic fields can also prohibit the process of stellar birth?
	As the collapsing cloud gets heated it gets progressively more
	ionized.  Ionized gas is constrained by magnetic field lines
	to move more easily along the field lines than across
	them.  This means that collapse is slowed down except in
	the direction parallel to the field lines.  This also influences
	the shape of the cloud.

3. What is an evolutionary track?
        It is a track or path on an H-R diagram that a star of a given mass
        (and composition) follows as it evolves.  The path mostly depends
        on mass, but also composition.  The tracks usually begin at the
        zero-age main sequence and end on the white dwarf cooling track.

7. What are T-Tauri stars?
	A T-Tauri star is a protostar with M<2M_Solar that has heated up 
        to the point in which extreme activity on the surface generates a 
        powerful "protostellar wind".  These winds can drive away material 
        in the outer portions of the cloud.

[8. Stars live longer than we do, so how do astronomers test the
    accuracy of theories of star formation?
	They study many, many stars that are in different stages
        of evolution.  They rely on star clusters to compare
        the evolutionary stages of stars which have the same age
        but have a range of masses.  Another important part of checking 
        theories is computer modeling and simulations. ]

[9.  At what evolutionary stages must astronomers use radio and
    infrared radiation to study prestellar objects?  Why can't they
    use visible light?
	Radio and infrared are most crucial for studying star formation
        for the early stages when the gas is in its cold and medium
        temperature stages.  Cold H_2 does not produce or absorb much
        visible radiation.  Neither does HI.  H_2 is traced by 
        molecules like CO which produce emission in radio, and HI produces
        21 cm radio waves.  The dust in the cold gas absorbs visible light
        and makes it impossible to see through, but IR and radio
        can see warm "clumps" inside of these clouds. ]
        
11. Explain the usefullness of an H-R Diagram in studying the evolution
    of stars.  Why can't evolutionary stages 1-3 be plotted on the diagrams?
        Stars evolve because they change their means of producing
        energy.  Since one axis of the H-R diagram is luminosity, or total
        energy produced, it makes sense to plot evolution on this diagram.
        The changes of energy production are accompanied by changes in 
        the size of the star and stars tend to cool and redden when they
        expand.  Hence they change in color as well as luminosity.
        Prestellar evolution stages 1-3 can't be plotted because there
        is no clear distinction between the protostar and its parent cloud.
        At stage 4, the protostar has a distinct photosphere where its
        color and luminosity can be defined.

[.  Compare the times necessary for the various stages in the formation
     of a star like the Sun.  Why are some so short and others so long?
	The times are very short for the first few stages of development,
	because during those stages, gravity essentially has free reign
	and the cloud is in free fall.  This is largely due to the presence
        of molecular H (H_2): the energy of collapse goes into its
	dissociation rather than raising the temperature and pressure
        of the gas.  As the protostar becomes hotter and denser, the
	internal pressure generated begins to fight the force of
	gravity.  This slows down the evolution. ]

[.  Compare and contrast the observed properties of open star clusters
     with globular star clusters.
	The open clusters are found in the plane of the galaxy, while
        globular clusters (GC's) are found in its halo.  OC's have 
        many fewer stars than GC's.  OC's are usually less compact.
        OC's contain young, blue stars, while GC's generally do not.
        OC's are young, GC's are old.  OC's are higher in metals than
        GC's. ]

14.  How can we tell whether a star cluster is young or old?
	The age of a star cluster is determined by the type of star
	that is about to leave its main sequence.  This spectral type
        is the "main sequence turnoff" of the cluster.  The more massive a
	star is, the faster it uses up hydrogen fuel on the main sequence,
	so as the star ages, the more massive stars leave the main
	sequence first.   If we can identify the star with the largest
	mass still on the main sequence, the cluster's age will be
	the same as the main sequence lifetime of that star.  This
        lifetime is given by T_life = 10^10 (M)^{-3} where M is the
        mass in solar masses.

---------------------------
Ch. 20

1. Why don't stars live forever?  Which types of stars live the
   longest?
	Because they have a limited supply of "fuel" for the fusion
	processes in their cores.  When the fuel has been converted to
        ash, either the star will collapse and end up as a white dwarf
        or it start up a new fusion process.  
        The low mass stars live the longest, even though they have less 
        fuel, because they burn their fuel at such a slow rate.

2. How do astronomers test the theory of stellar evolution?
	Star clusters provide important checks on our theory
        of stellar evolution.  A given cluster contains a bunch
	of stars with different masses but the same age.  By
        looking at many clusters with different ages, we can
	see that stars start out along the main sequence and
        then evolve off it, starting with the massive stars.
	Computer simulations can also be used to check the
        stability of stars with different masses and compositions.	
        	
2. How long can a star like the Sun keep buring hydrogen in its core?
   Why is the depletion of hydrogen in a star such an important
   event?
	About 10 billion years.
	Because that signifies the end of the longest stage of
        a stars life - the main sequence.  The depletion of H
	means that the core has lost its fuel supply for the
        main fusion process, the p-p chain.  This leads to 
	the collapse of the core and the onset of H shell burning.
        This new power source means that the star quickly changes
        its position on the H-R diagram: it moves to the right
        to become a sub-giant and then up the giant branch.

[7. Describe an important way in which winds from red-giant stars
    are linked to the interstellar medium.
	The winds from red-giant stars contain some products of 
        nuclear fusion (these are "dredged" up during the red-giant 
        phase).  So they are a means of enriching the ISM with dust 
        and metals (elements higher than He on the periodic chart).  
        Although supernovae can produce much higher elements, they 
        are less commonplace than red-giants, so red giants make a 
        big difference in the evolution of the ISM. ]

8. What is the internal structure of a star on the asymptotic-giant
    branch?
	An AGB star has an inert carbon core surrounded by a He-burning
        shell.  The He shell, in turn, is surrounded by a H-burning
        shell. 

9. What is a planetary nebula?  Why do many planetary nebulae appear
    as rings?
        A planetary nebula is the blown off outer atmosphere of an
        evolved star.  The central remnant is a white dwarf.  These
        usually appear as rings because the intrinsic shapes are
        either spherical shells, or double lobes.  
	A translucent, glowing shell will appear like a ring 
        because there is more gas along a sightline through the edge
        than through the center.  Double lobes can also appear ring
        like when viewed along their symmetry axis.

[10. Why are white dwarfs hard to observe?
	Because they have very low luminosities.  Their luminosities
	are low, in turn, because of their small size.]

11. How do the late evolutionary stages of high-mass stars differ
    from those of low-mass stars?
	Their tracks on the H-R diagram are more horizontal (zig-zagging
	to the right), while low mass stars move primarily upward.
        The high-mass tracks cover a wider range of colors/surf temps.
        Also, the high-mass stars go through more types of fusion in
	their cores than low-mass stars, and many of those types of fusion
        can happen simultaneously because of the shell-burning that occurs.
	More specifically, low-mass stars fuse H to He, and He to Carbon, but
	cannot fuse carbon.  High-mass stars can fuse carbon into oxygen
	and also create Neon, Silicon and iron.

13. How can astronomers measure the age of a star cluster?
	They can plot the stars on an H-R diagram and look for
	the main sequence turn-off point.  This point marks the highest 
        mass star which is still on the main sequence.  The mass-luminosity
        relationship can tell us the mass that produces each main sequence
        luminosity.  Theory is needed to calculate how long a star
        of a given mass should last on the main sequence, e.g., the
        equation T_life = 10^10 (M)^{-3} yrs.

[14. What are the Roche lobes of a binary system?
	They are tear-drop shaped regions of space that mark
	transition region between the gravitational attraction
        to one star and the other.  In particular, the two lobes
	meet at a point between the two stars where the pulls
	are equal.  If a star expands out of its Roche lobe,
	it's out atmosphere will be pulled down onto its companion. ]
	

---------------------------
Ch. 21
[. Under what circumstances will a binary star produce a nova?
	If the binary contains a white dwarf star and another larger
	star, a nova could occur.  The large star must be close enough
        to the w.d. so that its atmosphere will get pulled onto the
        w.d..  When that material hits the w.d., it heats and gives
        off extra light. ]

[. What is a light curve? How can it be used to identify a nova
or a supernova?
A light curve is a graph of intensity or brightness (or flux, etc)
versus time.  Both novae and supernovae have a steep rise in brightness
taking about a week, followed by a slower decline.  However, the
change in brightness and the maximum luminosity reached is much
greater (about 6 orders of magnitude more) for the supernova than
for the nova.  The nova light curve usually declines more sporadically
than the supernova. 

[. How do photodisintegration and neutronization contribute to the demise of 
a massive star?
As the iron core of a star collapses, the extreme temperatures make
the photons so energetic that they widdle down large nuclei into 
smaller ones. This takes up some of the thermal energy in the core,
reduces the pressure, and promotes further contraction.  At higher 
densities, the protons and electrons are forced together to become 
neutrons.  This reaction produces neutrinos in the process which
escape the core easily and carry additional energy away.  This
also promotes collapse and the shrinking down to the point of
core rebound (when the neutrons come into hard "contact")
occurs in about a second.]

[. What are the observational differences between Type I and
Type II supernovae?
Type I are defined observationally to be those supernova
showing very little hydrogen emission or absorption in their
spectrum.  Type II, does show hydrogen.  The Type Ia light
curve has a very predictable peak luminosity, followed by
a decline that has a characteristic change in slope at
2 months past peak.  The slope change corresponds to the
Nickel-56 decay transitioning to the Cobalt-56 decay.
There are various other Type II and Type Ib and Ic light
curves.  The Type II's generally have a long plateau 
in their light curves between about 1-3 months after peak.]

[. What is the Chandrasekhar mass and what does it have
to do with supernovae?
The Chandrasekhar mass is the maximum mass that a white
dwarf can have before it undergoes carbon detonation
(runaway carbon fusion).  This amount is 1.4 solar masses.
A white dwarf in a binary system can receive enough
mass from its companion to exceed this limit, thus
creating a Type Ia supernova. ]

6. How do the mechanisms responsible for the Type I 
and Type II supernovae explained their observed differences?
Since the Type Ia's are formed by a carbon-oxygen white
dwarf, the progenitor has very little hydrogen, and this
explains the lack of H features in the spectrum.  The 
fact that there is a 1.4 solar mass limit, means that
there is the same amount of energy available for the
explosion in all Type Ia's, and this results in the
maximum luminosities being around M_V~-19.3 for all of
them.  The Type II projenitors are massive stars that
still have H in their outer atmospheres, so their
spectra do show H features.  Some massive stars loose
most of their outer H shells to winds and when they
explode they produce Type Ib and Ic supernovae (also
with no H features).

[. How are nuclei heavier than iron formed?
They are formed by a neutron capture process in
which nuclei are bombarded by neutrons which join
with the nucleus to increase its isotope number. 
This process can happen before the explosion of a 
massive star in the s-process (slow neutron capture).
When the bombardment is amplified during the explosion of
a massive star, the most massive nuclei (above bismuth-209) 
can be created via the r-process (rapid neutron capture).  
During a supernova, even unstable nuclei 
can take in multiple neutrons before they have time to 
decay, thus growing into heavy nuclei not attainable
through the s-process.]

