AT 9th Ed.
Ch. 23 
only 1-15 odd were assigned

Review and Discussion 

1. What evidence do we have that we live in a disk galaxy?
A wide band of light completely surrounds us and is known as the Milky Way. 
Perpendicular to this band are relatively few stars. Our perspective is from 
within a large disk of stars. 

3. What do globular clusters tell us about our Galaxy and our place 
within it?
The globular clusters are found in the outer reaches of the Galaxy, in the 
halo, and orbit the galactic center. Many of them are found out of the plane 
of the Galaxy, and so can be easily observed.  If we can measure the distances 
to the globular clusters, we can make a three-dimensional map of their 
positions and thus locate their center of motion: the Galactic Center.  
Early in the 20th century, Harlow Shapley made such a map and determined 
that the center of motion was nowhere near the Earth or Sun; rather, it was 
about 25,000 light-years away, in the direction of the constellation Sagittarius.

5. What important discoveries were made early in the 20th century by
using RR Lyrae variables?
RR Lyrae variables are very useful for determining distances to globular 
clusters, because all of these pulsating stars have roughly the same absolute 
brightness. By comparing their apparent brightness with their absolute 
brightness, the distance to a group of RR Lyraes, say in a globular cluster, 
can be determined. By knowing how the globular clusters are distributed in 
the Galaxy, astronomers could map out the halo. Further, by studying the 
distribution of globular clusters, astronomers could locate the center of 
the Galaxy and find the distance to the center of the Galaxy from the Sun. 
This helped indicate to astronomers how large the Milky Way actually is.

7. Contrast the motions of disk and halo stars.
The stars in the Galactic disk move in roughly circular orbits around the 
center of the Galaxy. The orbits all lie in the plane of the disk, and all 
travel at roughly the same speed. Thus, these stars appear to travel with 
the Sun, and have low velocities relative to the Sun. The halo stars, in 
contrast, are moving in various directions, relative to the disk, forming a 
spherical halo around the Galaxy. These stars pass in and out of the disk, 
towards the center of the Galaxy and back out again into the halo. When seen 
from Earth, they appear to have high velocities relative to the Sun and other 
disk stars and the direction of their motion is at an angle to the plane of 
the disk.

9. Explain why galactic spiral arms are thought to be regions of recent
and ongoing star formation.
The spiral arms of a galaxy are bright and contain very luminous stars, 
open star clusters, and emission nebulae. Very luminous stars use up their 
hydrogen fuel quickly, and so must be very recently formed. Emission nebulae 
are often the birthplaces of stars, with hot newborn stars exciting the gas 
and causing it to glow.

11. What does the rotation curve of our Galaxy tell us about the Galaxy's
total mass?
The rotation of the Galaxy is actually the combined orbits of stars and 
gas around the Galaxy's center. Because the Galaxy is not a solid body, like 
the Earth, different parts of it move at different rates. The orbital motions 
are determined strictly by the amount of mass interior to the orbit. The 
velocity of the orbits at differing distances gives us the rotation curve 
of the Galaxy. By looking at the motion of an object in one of the outermost 
orbits, we can use Kepler's Third Law to find the total mass of the Galaxy.

13. What is gravitational microlensing, and can astronomers use it to 
search for dark matter?
Gravitational lensing is the bending of the path of a light wave by a 
gravitational field. If one star passes directly in front of another, the 
light of the more distant star may be bent in such a way that it is 
magnified and appears to brighten. This is called microlensing because
the images formed of the background star are usually unresolved and all we 
detect it the brightening.  We search for the class of dark matter candidates
called "MACHOs" by looking for microlensing of background stars by foreground 
objects that may be too dark for detection.
We also use "weak lensing" and "strong lensing" to detect dark matter in 
clusters of galaxies.  Here we cannot distinguish between MACHO's or WIMPs.

15. Why do astronomers think that a supermassive black hole lies at the
center of the Milky Way Galaxy?
Infrared observations of the galactic center reveal individual stars with
detectable motion around something dark and compact.  Several individual
orbits have been determined, most notably that of "S2" with a period
of about 15 years.  Applying Kepler's laws to the observed period and
radius of the orbit(s) give a mass of about 4x10^6 M_sol.
Many supermassive BH's have been measured in other galaxies, but only the
MW and one other galaxy (N4258) can rule out the alternative model
of a cluster of neutron stars (it would have to be so compact that
the neutron stars would collide with each other). 
Additional corroboration of the BH includes IR, X-ray, and Radio 
observations of rapid, violent gas motions centered on
a very compact radio source, Sag A*. 
 
