Homework from
Astronomy Today 
8th Ed.

Ch. 23   The Milky Way Galaxy
R&D 1-15 (odd) were assigned
Answers in [brackets] were not assigned.
Ch. 24 R&D 3,6,8

Review and Discussion 

1. What evidence do we have that we live in a disk galaxy?
A wide band of light completely surrounds us and is known as the Milky Way. 
Perpendicular to this band are relatively few stars. Our perspective is 
from within a large disk of stars. 

[2. Why is it difficult to map out our Galaxy from our vantage
point on Earth?
Since we are inside the disk of the Galaxy, it is hard to determine what 
it looks like from the outside. Dust clouds obscure most features that 
are distant. And it is difficult to tell how far the visible features
extend. ]

5. What important discoveries were made early in the 20th century by using 
RR Lyrae variables?
RR Lyrae variables are very useful for determining distances to globular 
clusters. By knowing how the globular clusters are distributed in 
the Galaxy, the halo component is mapped out. Harlow Shapley used the 
globular clusters in this way and could tell that center of our galaxy 
was not at our Sun but offset in the direction of Sagittarius.
This also provides a rough estimate of the size of the Milky Way
and our distance from the center.

[6. Of what use is radio astronomy in the study of Galactic structure?
In the radio part of the spectrum, atomic hydrogen gas emits 21-cm radiation. 
Because its long wavelength allows it to travel throughout the Galaxy, 
astronomers can use it to map the structure of gas clouds in the Galaxy. 
Molecular hydrogen is very difficult to observe, but other molecules, such 
as carbon monoxide, are used to map molecular clouds. ]

7. Contrast the motions of disk and halo stars.
The stars in the Galactic disk move in roughly circular orbits around the 
center of the Galaxy. The orbits all lie in the plane of the disk. The halo 
stars have approximately the same velocities as the disk stars but are moving 
in random directions relative to the disk, forming a spherical halo around 
the Galaxy. These stars pass in and out of the disk, towards the center of 
the Galaxy and back out again into the halo. When seen locally, they appear 
to have high velocities relative to the Sun and other disk stars and their
orbits are highly inclined with respect to the plane of the disk.

9. Explain why galactic spiral arms are thought to be regions of recent
and ongoing star formation.
The spiral arms of a galaxy are visually defined by both dust lanes,
and by strands of luminous, blue stars, 
open star clusters, and emission nebulae. All of these objects are found 
in star formation regions and are all considered young objects. Luminous
O and B stars MUST be young because they simply don't last long.
Even open clusters evaporate in a billion years and so are a sign
of ongoing star formation.

[10. What is self-propagating star formation?
Imagine a chain or matrix of interstellar gas clouds.  If one cloud
collapses, fragments and produces stars, it will be a source of
winds and shock waves when its most massive stars break free
of their cocoons and go supernova.
These winds and waves can trigger new star formation in a neighboring cloud. 
Similarly, when that neighboring cloud starts producing massive
stars, they can cause the collapse of still another cloud.
The formation of one group of stars provides the mechanism for the 
formation of more stars. ]

11. What does the rotation curve of our Galaxy tell us about the Galaxy's 
total mass?
The rotation curve is a plot of orbital speed versus distance from
the center of the Galaxy.  The orbital speed of a star depends on
how much matter is contained within a sphere centered on the Galaxy's
center, and with a radius equal to that of the star's orbit.
So the rotation curve tells us how much matter is contained within
any radius.  At the largest radii, we can estimate the total
mass of the Galaxy.  It appears to be 5-10 x 10^11 solar masses.
More total mass is implied by the rotation curve than can be 
accounted for by counting stars, gas, and dust.  This
is strong evidence for the presence of a halo of "dark matter" 
around our Galaxy.

[. Possible candidates for dark matter:
Some are: brown dwarfs, black 
dwarfs, black holes, WIMPS, MACHOS, ... ]

13. What is gravitational lensing, and can astronomers use it to
search for dark matter?
Gravitational lensing is the bending of light by a gravitational field. 
If one star passes directly in front of another, the light of the more 
distant star may be bent in such a way that the star appears to brighten. 
Dark matter in the form of MACHOs (Massive Compact Halo Objects)
can be searched for with gravitational (micro-)lensing.  A telescope
must stare at far away groups of stars (ideally, the magellanic
clouds) and look for an increase in brightness which has the
signature of a lensing event.  

15. Why do astronomers think that a supermassive black hole lies
at the center of the Milky Way galaxy?
The central regions of the Galaxy are obscured by thick clouds of 
interstellar dust. Visible light cannot penetrate these clouds. 
However, infrared and especially radio waves can easily penetrate 
these clouds and so we can see the center of the Galaxy at these wavelengths. 
We see individual stars so close to the center that we can see
their elliptical orbits take shape over time.  We know the
size and period of these orbits, so Kepler's 3rd law allows
us to determine the mass of the unseen object at the center
of mass of the central star cluster.

Ch. 24

3. Describe the four rungs in the distance-measurement ladder
used to determine the distance to a galaxy lying 5 Mpc away.
First, find the size of the AU using radar ranging to Venus.
Second, use trig parallax to find distances to stars out to
~200 pc which can be used to calibrated spectroscopic parallax.
Third, use spectroscopic parallax to find distances to clusters
containing Cepheids to calibrate the P-L relationship.
Fourth, use Cepheids to get the distance to the galaxy of
interest.

6. What are standard candles, and why are they important to
astronomy?
Standard candles are astronomical objects that have a 
predictable luminosity and can be identified by some
means (light curve or spectrum).  They are most useful
for determining distances if they are also very luminous.

8. What is Hubble's law?  How is it used by astronomers
to measure distances to galaxies?
The Hubble law is the proportionality between recession
velocity and distance.  The recession velocity is actually
measured from the redshift of a galaxy's light.  So 
astronomers must take a spectrum of the galaxy and 
measure the wavelength, W_obs, of identifying features in their
spectrum (e.g., calcium H&K absorption or H-alpha emission).
They then compare this to the rest wavelength, W_rest, to get 
the redshift:  (W_obs - W_rest )/W_rest = z, where z is redshift.
Then V = cz is used in V = HoD.  Solve for D to get the 
distance.

