
	Revisions to MS 56285:  "Kinematics of Ten Early-Type Galaxies
from Hubble Space Telescope and Ground-Based Spectroscopy"

         by Jason Pinkney, Karl Gebhardt, Ralf Bender, Gary Bower,
	Alan Dressler, S. M. Faber, Alexei V. Filippenko, Richard Green,
	Luis C. Ho, John Kormendy, Tod R. Lauer, John Magorian, 
	Douglas Richstone, and Scott Tremaine.

I. As suggested by Linda Sparke, Scientific Editor:
----------------------------------------------------------
  1) removed the citation to Gebhardt 2000 in the abstract.
  2) replaced "BH" with "black Hole" in the abstract.

II. Other, unsolicited changes:
----------------------------------------------------------
  1) corrected first sentence of acknowledgements.

III. Response to referee's suggestions:
----------------------------------------------------------
	First off, thanks for the suggestions.  I'm sure they
will improve the paper.  Also, apologies for not making the color 
versions of the kinematic profiles available.  We intend to
make the color versions available for the electronic addition.

1 General Comments
1.1 Description of the data reduction, Section 4.1
	I'm not actually an expert on CALSTIS so a thorough 
comparison is not a good idea.  
	I will insert a short paragraph near the end of 
this discussion which will state the most important differences.

	Removed "Because of dithering, every combined pixel
was made from at least 6 pixels, ..." from paragraph 2.
	Added "Since there were 5 dither positions, every final
pixel value was a combination of up to 5 distinct pixels on the
CCD chip." to the 4th paragraph.

1.2 Reliability test of the kinematics
	We need to "convince the reader that some confidence can
be attached to the extracted [H3 and H4] parameters".
	Two of our authors, Gebhardt and Bender, have thoroughly
compared H4 measurements from the MPL and FCQ methods.  H4 was
focused on because 1) it is the most difficult to measure in
the data, and 2) some of our ground based measurements of H4
were systematically lower than some independent ones by Bender.

1.3 Comments on the individual galaxies
	Drop any results in my paper if they are duplicated
by Lauer et al. or Kormendy et al.
	The "Lauer et al" reference will be switched to 
"private communication" because the work done by Lauer will
not be published separately any time soon.  The Kormendy
paper "Supermassive Black Holes in Galaxy Disks and Pseudobulges"
is not heavily duplicated here.  My paper discusses N3384 and
N7457 as possible pseudobulges, while Kormendy's only gives
attention to NGC 7457.  Namely, it is mentioned that N7457
is "well below the Faber-Jackson relation for unbarred galaxy
bulges).  
	[Do we want to eliminate the definition of pseudobulges
and other "folklore"?]

2. Specific comments in order of appearance
	
X Abstract - on. Change H3 and H4 to h3 and h4, and vice versa.

  Section 4.1, pg. 9.  Give a reference for the FITSIO subroutines.

  Section 4.5, pg. 20: The referee thinks that Figs 6 and 7 are 
redundant, and asks why a linear scale was used  to compare
surface brightness profiles.  
  I do not want these profiles to look like surface brightness
profiles because they are not produced like real surface brightness
profiles:  1) The light selected along the slit does not correspond
to any standard filter (BVRI) used in surface photometry.  2) In 
surface photometry, sub-pixel resolution can be achieved with
deconvolution and sub-pixel dithering.  3) Standard profiles are
created by averaging around elliptical isophotes, not across a
2-4 pixel wide slit.  So these profiles may diverge from standard 
ones especially at small radii.  Standard profiles can be produced
(and have been for most of these galaxies) using WFPC2 or WFPC data.
  The purpose of these figures is not best surved by a log brightness
scale, and is in fact hindered by one.  (Indeed, I made one and
omitted it.) The main reasons, other than conformity, that I can see 
for the conventional choice of log-log plots are: 1) to enlarge the small 
radii relative to large radii because the surface brightness changes 
quickly near the center, 2) to demonstrate adherance to (double) 
power-laws, 3) to express brightness using a standard photometric system.  
(1) is not needed because we don't have strong signal out to large
radii.  (2) is old news and has been done for most of these galaxies.
(3) is difficult to do here because of unconventional spectral 
range used.

  My intentions for the these figures were: 1) to show how many counts
were obtained in a typical 1300 sec exposure with STIS.  The reader can 
immediately tell how much signal one galaxy has compared to another.
The reader can quickly estimate the Poisson errors using these plots.  
The plots immediately demonstrate why we only plot kinematic quantities within 
1" (20 pixels) of the center for most galaxies.  2) To show that
NGC 4473 is quite asymmetric compared to the other galaxies.
3) To allow one to quantitatively estimate the asymmetry in NGC 4473.

	A logarithmic scale would compress the large intensities
relative to the small ones, making the asymmetry in NGC 4473 more
difficult to see (it occurs near the peak).  Plot 7 shows 


