
AT 9th edition
Ch. 9 
Discussion 1-15 odd

1. Why does Venus appear so bright to the eye?  Upon what factors does the planet's brightness depend?

The factors determining the brightness of a planet include:
   1) distance to the planet from Earth
   2) distance of the planet from the Sun
   3) albedo of the planet
   4) size of the planet
   5) phase of the planet
Venus is completely covered by clouds that reflect much of the sunlight 
received by Venus back into space (factor 3). It receives a great deal 
of sunlight to reflect because it is so close to the Sun (factor 2). 
Venus also is one of the closest planets to the Earth (factor 1), 
depending on where it is in its orbit. 
It's "maximum brilliancy" occurs at the two positions between inferior
conjunction and maximum elongation east and west.  (This is when the 
phase is a thin crescent, so factor 1 is winning over factor 5.)

3. What is our current best explanation of Venus's slow, retrograde
spin?  

Our best explanation is that Venus was struck by a large object at 
just the right angle and speed to slow and even reverse its spin.

5. What did UV images returned by Pioneer Venus show about the planet's
high-level clouds?

The ultraviolet images revealed fast-moving upper layers of clouds. 
This includes a jet stream, where clouds have velocities of up to 
400 km/hr.

7. What are the main constituents of Venus' atmosphere?

The dominant component of the atmosphere of Venus is carbon dioxide, 
accounting for 96.5 percent of the atmosphere by volume. Almost all of 
the remaining 3.5 percent is nitrogen. Trace amounts of other gases, 
such as water vapor, carbon monoxide, sulfur dioxide, and argon are 
also found. The clouds in the upper atmosphere are made of crystals of 
sulfuric acid. Lower levels have droplets of SO_2.

9. If Venus had formed at Earth's distance from the Sun, what do you
imagine its climate would be like today?  Why do you think so?

If Venus were at Earth's distance from the Sun, it would likely be 
cool enough to have extensive oceans of liquid water. Therefore, it is 
likely that it would have followed a similar path of climate development 
as the Earth. Venus is smaller than the Earth, however, with a lower 
surface gravity. It might not have been able to hold onto as much of an 
atmosphere as the Earth.

11. How are the impact craters of Venus different from those found on
other bodies in the solar system?

There are very few small impact craters on Venus, because meteoroids 
smaller than about 1 km are destroyed as they travel through the thick 
atmosphere. The smaller impact craters that do exist appear to have been 
created by larger bodies that shattered prior to impact. There are also 
few very large craters, but such large meteoroids were more common in 
the very early days of the solar system, and ancient large craters 
may have been filled in by more recent lava flows on the surface.

13. What is the evidence for active volcanoes on Venus?

The levels of sulfur dioxide above Venus' clouds show large and fairly 
frequent fluctuations which may be the result of volcanic eruptions. 
The Pioneer and the Venera orbiter observed bursts of radio energy 
from the Beta and Aphrodite regions, similar to those produced by 
lightning discharges that often occur in the plumes of erupting 
volcanoes on Earth. The Venus Express has also detected unusually 
hot places on the surface of Venus that may indicate ongoing volcanic 
activity.
2020 Update: a detailed comparison of models of coronae to actual
coronae indicate that these objects go through morphological changes.
Many coronae in late stages of development exist suggesting that some
are fresh.

15. Do you think that Earth is in any danger of being subject to a 
runaway greenhouse effect like that on Venus?

Earth's greater distance from the Sun, larger surface gravity, and 
large amount of liquid water on its surface are all factors that would 
help prevent a runaway greenhouse effect like that of Venus. 
Most of our carbon dioxide is locked away in carbonate rocks in the 
crust, or dissolved into the oceans.  Most or all of that would have 
to be released in order for Earth to become like Venus, and this could 
only happen if Earth's temperature were to increase dramatically. 
There appear to be no mechanisms to heat the Earth sufficiently to 
"jump-start" this process, although the possibility of warming caused 
by the release of carbon dioxide by human activities is a potential 
source of concern. Also, just because Earth can't get as extreme
as Venus does not mean it can't experience climate change to an
extent that would be catastrophic to human civilization.

