
AT 9th Ed.
Ch. 10 Mars
R&D 1,3-6,8,12

1. Why is opposition the best time to see Mars from Earth?
Why are some Martian oppositions better than others for 
viewing Mars?
	During opposition, not only is Mars 180 degrees
away from the Sun (placing it at the Meridian at midnight),
but Mars is also closest to the Earth.  That makes it subtend
the largest angle, making features like craters and mountains
appear their largest.  Since the orbits of Mars and the Earth
are both elliptical, some oppositions will bring the planets
closer than others.  About every 15 years (8 oppositions) Mars 
will have an opposition when it is close to its perihelion and Earth
is near its aphelion, giving the optimum close-up view.

3. Describe the two polar caps, their seasonal and permanent
composition, and the differences between them.
	The N polar cap has a residual ("permanent") composition
of water ice, while the S polar cap has a residual CO_2
(dry ice) composition.  Because of Mars' eccentric orbit, 
the southern hemisphere has long winters coinciding with aphelion
and short, intense summers coinciding with perihelion.  Consequently,
it can build the largest polar cap during its winter, 4000 km across 
(compared to the maximum northern cap of 3000 km).  During
the short but intense southern summers, the S polar cap looses
so much CO2 that the atmospheric pressure of Mars increases.
The southern residual cap (CO_2+H2O, 350 km) is actually smaller
than the northern residual cap (H2O, 1000 km).

4. Why is Mars red?
	The surface rocks have a great deal of iron-based minerals.
These form iron oxide (rust) with oxygen.  The rocks have been
weathered into sand/dust which is also predominantly red and which
can be deposited all over the planet during dust storms.

5. Describe the major large-scale surface features of Mars.
	Mars has the Tharsis bulge, a high altitude region mostly
in the Northern hemisphere which contains the largest shield volcanoes
in the solar system.  On the Eastern side of the Tharsis bulge is
the huge, canyon-like fault Valles Marineris.  The Northern part of
the  planet is systematically lower in altitude and younger than
the southern half, as indicated by a lower crater density and more
signs of flooding by water.  The southern hemisphere
contains its own, low-altitude region: the circular Hellas Basin.

6. Why were Martian volcanoes able to grow so large? 
	Mar's surface has a lower surface gravity than Earth and
Venus which allows mountains to reach a greater height before
the crust can no longer support them.  Another factor is the lack
of plate tectonics on Mars, which allows hot spots under the crust
to feed the same volcano indefinitely.  

[ 7. Why couldn't you breath on Mars?
	The composition of the Martian atmosphere has a much lower
fraction of oxygen than we are used to (0.13% instead of 16%).
Even if it had a higher oxygen fraction, we still could not 
breath because we are accustomed to 150 x higher pressure. ]

8. What is the evidence that water once flowed on Mars?  Is there
liquid water on Mars today?
Many examples of runoff channels and outflow channels exist on
Mars.  Runoff channels are like old river channels, while outflow
channels are caused by more catastrophic, large-scale flooding
(like the breaking of a natural dam).  There are also what appear
to be lake shores that receded over time.  Martian rovers have
found "blueberries" and white silica deposits which were probably
formed in liquid water environments.
There are several observations pointing towards possible liquid
water on Mars today, but they all have alternative explanations.
For example, the "brine flows" or RSL (Recurrent Slope Lineae)
look like water stains that change with the season, but they
are probably just granular flows (because they only occur on 
slopes greater than ~25 degrees).  There are also gullies and
alluvial fans that are probably younger than 2 million years,
which is young compared to the age of any large scale feature
on Mars.

9. Is there water on Mars today, in any form?
	Yes.  It exists in small quantities in the atmosphere and
can sometimes even form fog.  It exists as ice on the polar ice caps.
Large quantities are also hidden under the surface as a "permafrost"
in latitudes over 50 degrees away from the equator.
Recently, brine lakes have been detected by ground-penetrating 
radar 1.5 km under the surface near the Martian South Pole.
These are thought to be liquid water with dissolved salts which
prevent the water from freezing.

11. Compare and contrast the evolution of the atmospheres of Mars,
Venus, and Earth.
	It is reasonable to assume that these 3 planets began with
similar abundances of CO2, water, and oxygen.  But they evolved in
very different ways.  Life evolved on Earth which produced higher
amounts of O2 in the atmosphere.  Earth currently has a majority
of its CO2 tied up in rocks and oceans.  On Venus, a runaway 
greenhouse effect released more and more of its CO2 as it heated
and evaporated more and more of its H2O until it could dissociate
into H and O in the upper atmosphere and escape the planet.
Mars dried out in a different way.  It was probably once covered
by water oceans with a more substantial, warmer atmosphere.  As it 
cooled, the water froze out of the atmosphere and into permafrost and ice
caps.  As the water left, a greenhouse gas left the atmosphere, allowing
an "inverse runaway greenhouse effect".   Mars may have also lost
some of its atmosphere through escape from its outer atmosphere.

12. What do measurements of the Martian magnetism tell us about the
planets interior?
First, the magnetic field is very weak (1/800 the Earth's field
according to Mars Global Surveyor, 1997).  This means that the
dynamo effect is no longer effective.  The spin rate of the
planet is enough to cause the dynamo effect, so the problem must
be the lack of a liquid, conductive magma in the interior.

[ 13. What is the evidence that Mars never melted as extensively 
as did the Earth?
It has a low level of surface volcanism, no magnetic field. ]

[ 15. How were the masses of Mars's Moons measured, and what did
these measurements tell us about their origin?
	They exert a noticeable gravitational influence on the
space probes orbitting Mars.  Newton's laws can be applied to 
deduce their masses.   ]
