
	PHYS 253  Stellar and Galactic Astronomy

Chapter 1 R&D 1-19 odd
	
1. Compare sizes of the Earth, Sun, Milky Way and Universe.
    D_E X 100 = D_Sun  
    D_Sun X 10^11 = D_M.W.
    D_M.W. X 10^5 = D_Univese

3. 1 LY = 9.5 x 10^12 km

5. A constellation is a designated region of the sky which contains one
   or more asterisms.  These are a usefull way to divide up the sky into
   subsections.  Every star must fall into one of the subsections, and the
   subsections contain a recognizable asterism so they are easy to learn.
   The constellation then provides a means of naming the star, e.g., "the
   brightest star in Orion will be alpha Orionis" etc.  For those who
   learn where the constellations are, just hearing the name of the star
   then gives them an idea of where to look for it.
7. The solar day is 3m56s longer because the Earth is revolving around
   the Sun CCW as it rotates CCW and that means it must rotate about 1 degree
   farther to line up with the Sun.

9. Why do we see different stars at different times of the year?
   It helps to choose a time to explain this, so consider looking at
   the sky at midnight.  If you look straight up, then you are looking roughly
   along a line from the Sun that goes through the Earth and points to
   the stars above you.  As the Earth revolves around the Sun, that line  
   points to different constellations.  Thus, you see different stars at
   midnight on different dates.  Similarly, the Sun is superimposed
   upon different zodiacal constellations throughout the year (you just can't
   see them behind the Sun because the Sun lights up our sky.)

11. Precession is a wobbling of the Earth's spin axis whereby it points towards
   different stars along a circular path and makes a complete cycle in 26,000 years.
   Precession is also the westward motion of the vernal equinox along the 
   celestial equator of 50" per year.  Precession is caused by the gravitational
   pull on the Earth's equatorial bulge by the Sun and (especially) the Moon.
   If the Earth were not tilted relative to the orbital planes of the Sun and
   Moon, their would be no precession.

13. Why do we see different phases of the Moon if one complete hemisphere of
   the Moon is always lit by the sun?
    The lit hemisphere appears on the near side of a Moon during a full Moon
    and on the far side of the Moon during a new Moon.  This is basically caused
    by the orbitting of the Moon around us.  One hemisphere faces Earth while the 
    lit hemisphere faces the Sun.  Only on the full Moon are these two hemispheres
    the same.

15. Why aren't there lunar and solar eclipses every month?
    The Earth-Moon orbital plane is tilted by 5 degrees with respect to the 
    Earth-Sun orbital plane (the ecliptic).  Thus, sometimes the Moon will
    appear to pass below or above the point that would cause an eclipse.

17. Parallax is the apparent motion of something caused by the motion of
    the observer.  An example is the apparent motion of a tree relative
    to a background mountain as the observer drives passed on a highway.

19. To determine the diameter of a far away object, you need to known the
    distance to the object and the angle subtended by the object.
    The diameter is then given by diam = dist X angle  where the angle
    is in radians (1 radian = 57 degrees.)


