

	PHYS 253  Stellar and Galactic Astronomy

Chapter 1 R&D 
    Only 1,2,5,7-10 were assigned.
	
1. Compare sizes of the Earth, Sun, Milky Way and Universe.
    D_E X 100 = D_Sun  
    D_Sun X 10^11 = D_M.W.
    D_M.W. X 10^5 = D_Univese

2. The universe can be defined as everything (the sum total of
   all space, time, and matter).  Some also take "universe" to
   be short for "the observable universe", which is all that 
   can be observed.  These two can differ because of the finite
   age of the universe and the finite speed of light.

3. 1 LY = 9.5 x 10^12 km.
   Interestingly, there are 63,300 AU in 1 LY.  This is the same number
   as inches in a mile.

4. The scientific method is a process for discovering the best possible 
   explanation as to why something occurs.  The process begins when obs-
   ervations lead to the formulation of a hypothesis, a preliminary
   explanation that makes testable predictions.  Experiments are run
   to test the hypothesis.  If they do not agree, the hypothesis is
   discarded or modified.  The new hypothesis is tested, and so on.
   Gradually a coherent theory is formed to explain and predict a variety of 
   observable phenomena.

5. A constellation is a designated region of the sky which contains one
   or more asterisms.  These are a usefull way to divide up the sky into
   subsections.  Every star must fall into one of the subsections, and the
   subsections contain a recognizable asterism so they are easy to learn.
   The constellation then provides a means of naming the star, e.g., "the
   brightest star in Orion will be alpha Orionis" etc.  For those who
   learn where the constellations are, just hearing the name of the star
   then gives them an idea of where to look for it.

6. The motion of the Sun in the sky is an illusion caused by the Earth's spin.
   The Sun appears to rise in the East and move westward across the sky
   because the Earth beneath us is spinning eastward, or counterclockwise
   as viewed from the north.  Therefore, all non-artificial celestial
   objects have this apparent motion, including the Moon and stars.

7. The solar day is 3m56s longer because the Earth is revolving around
   the Sun CCW as it rotates CCW and that means it must rotate about 1 degree
   farther to line up with the Sun.

8. This number would be your age in years.

9. Why do we see different stars at different times of the year?
   It helps to choose a time to explain this, so consider looking at
   the sky at midnight.  If you look straight up, then you are looking roughly
   along a line from the Sun that goes through the Earth and points to
   the stars above you.  As the Earth revolves around the Sun, that line  
   points to different constellations.  Thus, you see different stars at
   midnight on different dates.  Similarly, the Sun is superimposed
   upon different zodiacal constellations throughout the year (you just can't
   see them behind the Sun because the Sun lights up our sky.)

10. There are seasons on Earth because the rotation axis of Earth 
   is tilted with respect to the normal to the ecliptic plane. This
   tilt means that a given location on Earth receives different angles
   and intensities of sunlight over the course of Earth's orbit.  When
   it is summer at your location, the Sun is almost directly overhead
   at noon.  Therefore, the rays of the Sun's light strike the ground
   at nearly a 90 degree angle and is very concentrated. In winter,  
   however, the Sun never gets very high, even at noon, and the sunlight
   is more diffuse on the ground. 

11. Precession is a wobbling of the Earth's spin axis whereby it points towards
   different stars along a circular path and makes a complete cycle in 26,000 years.
   Precession is also the westward motion of the vernal equinox along the 
   celestial equator of 50" per year.  Precession is caused by the gravitational
   pull on the Earth's equatorial bulge by the Sun and (especially) the Moon.
   If the Earth were not tilted relative to the orbital planes of the Sun and
   Moon, their would be no precession.

12. In the modern era, there is a need for coordinationi over long distances
   in transportation and communication.  Time zones were developed to help
   maintain a consistent time over large areas, and to allow for easy 
   adjustments to synchronize with people far away.  Leap years arose from
   the realization that Earth does not orbit the Sun in an integer number
   of days.

13. Why do we see different phases of the Moon if one complete hemisphere of
   the Moon is always lit by the sun?
    The lit hemisphere appears on the near side of a Moon during a full Moon
    and on the far side of the Moon during a new Moon.  This is basically caused
    by the orbitting of the Moon around us.  One hemisphere faces Earth while the 
    lit hemisphere faces the Sun.  Only on the full Moon are these two hemispheres
    the same.

14. What causes a lunar eclipse?  A solar eclipse?
    A lunar eclipse is caused by the shadow of the Earth falling upon the
    Moon.  For a solar eclipse, the shadow of the Moon falls on the Earth.

15. Why aren't there lunar and solar eclipses every month?
    The Earth-Moon orbital plane is tilted by 5 degrees with respect to the 
    Earth-Sun orbital plane (the ecliptic).  Thus, sometimes the Moon will
    appear to pass below or above the point that would cause an eclipse.

16. Do you think an observer on another planet might see eclipses?  Why
    or why not?
    Yes they might if that planet has Moons.  The moons of planets like
    Jupiter and Saturn regularly cast shadows on their parent planets.
    The moons can also cross through the large shadow cones of the parent
    planets.

17. Parallax is the apparent motion of something caused by the motion of
    the observer.  An example is the apparent motion of a tree relative
    to a background mountain as the observer drives passed on a highway.

18. Why is it necessary to have a long baseline when using triangulation
    to measure the distances to objects in space?
    Because the larger the baseline, the larger an angle is subtenened
    by the object as it appears to move back and forth.  The atmosphere
    prevents us from seeing  angles smaller than about 1", so the larger
    the parallax angle, the more clearly we will be able to measure
    the distance to an  object. 

19. To determine the diameter of a far away object, you need to known the
    distance to the object and the angle subtended by the object.
    The diameter is then given by diam = dist X angle  where the angle
    is in radians (1 radian = 57 degrees.)

20. If you travelled to the outermost planet in our solar system, would the
    constellations would appear to change their shapes?
	No, 40 AU is too tiny compared the inter-stellar distances.
    If you travel to the next nearest star, the constellations should look
    a little different but not much.
	If you travelled to the center of your Galaxy ...
	Yes, the stars would all be different.


Chapter 1 Multiple Choice
1) (b) 
2) (b)
3) (d) aquarius
4) (a) longer

Problems
2 a) 1x10^3, 1x10^(-6), 1.001x10^3, 1x10^15,
     1.23x10^5, 4.56x10^(-4)
b) 31,600,000
   299,800
   0.0000000000667
   2x10^(0)
c) 2000.01
   1.19x10^(55)
   9.47368x10^(12)

5.
