
AT 6th Ed.
Ch. 2 Homework
Assigned: R&D 1-4,8-16,20
	  Mult Choice 1-3,5,7-10

1.  The Chinese contributed a calendar and records of 
celestial events like comets and novae which are still used today.
The Islamic culture built on the Almagest by Ptolemy during
the dark ages.  They gave most stars the names we use today.
They established trigonometric and algebraic methods important
in astronomy.
2.  The geocentric model has the Earth at the center with 
the Sun and Moon orbitting it. The inferior planets moved on
epicycles which were centered on a bar between the Earth and
the Sun.  The superior planets were also modelled as moving on 
epicycles which moved on deferents, but the deferents were
beyond the Sun.  The stars were on the most distant "sphere".
3. I consider its basic flaw to be the fact that the Earth
is at the center.
4. Copernicus brought back the heliocentric system.  It was
still flawed in that it insisted on circular motions.
8. The gibbous phase of Venus disproved the Ptolemaic model.
   The presence of moons orbitting Jupiter showed that not
   all objects circled the Earth.
   The sunspots showed that the Sun was marred and imperfect.
9.  First Law: the orbits of planets are i nthe shape of an ellipse
   with the Sun at one focus.  Second Law: a line connecting the
   Sun and a planet sweeps out equal areas in equal time intervals.
   Third Law: the square of the orbital period is proportional
   to the cube of the semi-major axis.
10.  Tycho made meticulous observations of the positions of
   planets over many years.  Kepler then analyzed this data
   and determined the true orbits of the planets around the Sun.
11.  The Astronomical Unit, defined as the semi-major axis of
   the Earth's orbit, was used to describe the distances to
   other planets but the size of the AU was not known.  Using
   radar, which allows distances to be determine directly in
   units such as kilometers, the distance to Venus could be
   measured.  With the distance to Venus known in kilometers
   the length of the AU could be determined in km.
12. Astronomers used triangulation of Mercury and especially
   Venus as they transitted the Sun.  By finding the distances
   to these planets during transit, they could find the sizes
   of their orbits and, from that, the size of the AU.
13. Kepler's laws are empirical because they were based on
   analysis of observational data.  They are descriptive laws
   which don't explain why the planets move as they do.
14.  1st law:  every body continues in a state of rest or in 
   uniform motion in a straight line unless it experiences
   some net force.  2nd law: when a force F acts on a body
   of mass m it causes the body to accelerate at a rate a=F/m
   3rd law: for every force there is an equal but opposite
   force.
15. The two modification by Newton to Kepler's laws:
   1) For the first law, one focus of each elliptical orbit
      was located at the center-of-mass of the solar system
      rather than on the Sun itself.
   2) For the 3rd law, the mass of the system should be
      taken into account to make it more widely applicable ...
	 P^2 = R^3/M_tot
16.  The Earth moves in response to the baseball but its motion
    is not noticeable because it is so slight.  Since Newton's
    2nd law states that an object's acceleration is inversely
    proportional to its mass (a=F/m), the smaller mass will
    accelerate more for a given force.
20. If the Sun's gravity suddenly stopped, Earth would continue
    at its current velocity but in a straight line path.  The
    gravitational pull between the Earth and Sun is what causes
    the curved, elliptical orbit of the Earth.

Mult Choice
1. Planets near opposition (a) rise in the east.
   (All planets rise in the east.)
2. Flaw in Copernicus's model:  d) circular orbits
3. b) orbiting the Sun
 . 
5. c) third law of planetary distances
 . 
7. c) more than two times longer to traverse
8. b) causes the ball to accelerate downward
9. c) fly off into space
10. a) moves more slowly than the less massive star.
