 

Ch. 24 AT 7th Ed.
Review and Discussion 
* = Assigned: 1-19 odd

*1. The size of the central bulge relative to the disk distinguishes type a, b, and c. 
    Type a has the largest bulge to disk ratio. 

2. Elliptical galaxies have a stellar content remindful of the halo of our galaxy. The stars are 
generally low mass and old. Their distribution more resembles our halo too; ellipticals 
probably have a prolate shape and some may even be spherical. There is no observed cold 
gas or dust in either the elliptical galaxies or in our halo. However, x-ray emissions from 
elliptical galaxies indicate the presence of large amounts of very hot gas throughout the 
galaxy and even beyond; the halo has no x-ray emissions. 

*3. Radar ranging is used to establish distances within the solar system and gives us the 
size of the A.U.  Parallax uses triangulation to measure distances to the nearest stars. 
The radius of the Earth's orbit, 1 A.U. is one side of the triangle. Distances are good 
out to about 100 pc. 
	Spectroscopic parallax utilizes the properties of stars in the H–R diagram. Using parallax, 
the absolute luminosities of some types of stars are established. When identified in the H–R 
diagram, similar stars at unknown distances can have their distances determined by 
comparing their apparent luminosities with those that are known. Distances can be 
determined to at least 1,000 pc. 
	Pulsating variable stars such as Cepheids have a strong relationship between the period of 
their pulsations and their absolute luminosities. Once established using nearby 
Cepheids, this method can be extended to the nearest galaxies. Distances to at 
least 5 Mpc are possible. 

 

4. The Local Group of galaxies is about one million parsecs (1 Mpc) in diameter. The 20 or so 
galaxies making up this group fill very little of the space; only 3 of the galaxies are of full 
size, the others are dwarf irregulars or ellipticals. 

*5. A standard candle is an object with a known luminosity. As such, when seen at a distance 
astronomers can determine that distance by comparing the observed and known luminosities 
and using the inverse square law. 

6. The Tully–Fisher relation is a correlation between a galaxy’s luminosity and its rotational 
velocity. The rotational velocity is determined from the broadening of the 21-cm line width. 
Here is a way in which a galaxy’s total luminosity can be independently determined and, 
when compared to its apparent luminosity, the distance can be calculated. This relation is 
also independent of many of the other methods in its calibration. 

*7. The Virgo Cluster is one of the nearest rich clusters of galaxies. It contains about 2500 
galaxies and is about 20 Mpc distant. 

8. Galaxies are observed to have redshifted spectra, which is interpreted as meaning that all 
galaxies are receding from us. Hubble discovered that the recessional velocity is 
proportional to the distance for all galaxies. This is known as the Hubble Law. 

*9. Once the Hubble Law is known, it is almost trivial to use for determining distances to 
galaxies. A spectrum must be obtained of the galaxy.  The spectrum of a galaxy will reveal 
its redshift (z), this in turn gives its recessional or radial velocity (V=cz). The Hubble 
Law states how this velocity is proportional to the distance (V=HoD); the distance is then
solved for.

10. In order to establish the Hubble Law, each galaxy observed must have its velocity and 
distance determined. The velocity is relatively easy to determine because it comes directly 
from the spectrum of the galaxy. The distance, however, is much more difficult and 
uncertain. Hubble’s constant is the constant of proportionality between the distance and the 
velocity of galaxies. Its value ranges between 50 and 90 km/s/Mpc. With distances 
uncertain, Hubble’s constant remains uncertain, too. 

*11. Active galaxies are different from normal galaxies in at least two ways. First, they emit 
much more radiation than normal galaxies, up to thousands of times more. Second, the 
nature of the radiation is different. Normal galaxies emit most of their radiation around and 
near the visible part of the spectrum. This is because they are composed of stars which are 
all emitting light at various wavelengths of the visible spectrum. But active galaxies emit 
most of their radiation at infrared or radio wavelengths. The source of these emissions 
must be other than stars and this radiation is referred to as nonthermal radiation. 
 A normal galaxy emits most of its light in and near visible wavelengths. In the radio part of 
the spectrum, emissions are typically a million times less. In an active galaxy, this situation 
can almost be reversed. Their optical radiation may be approximately the same as a normal 
galaxy, even a bit less, but their radio emissions can be tens of millions or more greater. 

12. There are only a few active galaxies relatively nearby. Most are much more distant. 

*13. Seyfert galaxies emit most of their radiation from a small central region called a galactic 
nucleus. The radiation coming from the nucleus is nonstellar. The spectrum of the nucleus 
is also nonstellar, with many strong, wide emission lines of highly ionized heavy elements. 
The line widths indicate high internal motions on the order of 1,000 km/s. 

 The primary source of energy for a Seyfert galaxy comes from its center because we 
observe about 10 times as much energy coming from the nucleus and it is just this radiation 
that is nonstellar. 

14. The lobes of a radio galaxy are aligned on either side of the nucleus; a straight line joining 
the lobes would always pass through the nucleus. In some lobe radio galaxies a filament of 
radio-emitting material can be traced connecting the lobes to the nucleus. 

*15. The energy-emitting regions of active galaxies are highly variable over time. This becomes 
a constraint on how large they can be. They are generally considered to be smaller than a 
parsec. 

16. The spectra of quasars have highly redshifted lines. The redshift is so high, lines normally 
found in the ultraviolet are shifted into the visible; visible lines are shifted out into the 
infrared. This is what caused so much confusion in understanding their spectra. 
Astronomers were expecting to see normal visible lines that were slightly shifted. The high 
redshifts also implied very large distance, much farther away than ever seen in any other 
type of object. 

*17. Redshifts are observed; they have not been interpreted as anything like a velocity or 
distance. When the latter is done, the Hubble constant must be used and there is still 
uncertainty about its value. 

18. Quasars appear as faint stars yet their redshifts indicate enormous distances. The 
luminosity of quasars could be calculated from these two facts and turned out to be 
extremely high. 

*19. In the nucleus of an active galaxy is a massive black hole surrounded by an accretion disc. 
Gas moving in this disc emits large quantities of radiation before entering the black hole. 
Up to 20% of the rest mass of the gas can be emitted before entering the black hole. This 
model can also account for the small size of the central engine, the rapid motions, and 
possibly jets coming out of the disc. 

20. Radio lobes emit synchrotron radiation which is produced by fast moving electrons in a 
magnetic field. As the electrons spiral around the magnetic field lines, they lose energy and 
radiate it away in the form of radio waves. The electrons and magnetic fields are ejected 
out of the accretion disc surrounding the supermassive black hole at the center of active 
galaxies. This jet of material is ejected in opposite directions. 


Conceptual Self-Test 

1. F 
2. F 
3. T 
4. F 
5. T 
6. T 
7. F 
8. F 
9. T 
10. T 
11. A 
12. C 
13. A 
14. C 
15. C 
16. B 
17. B 
18. B 
19. A 
20. B 

