AT 7th Ed.
Ch. 23 
only 1-19 odd were assigned

Review and Discussion 

1. A wide band of light completely surrounds us and is known as the Milky Way. 
Perpendicular to this band are relatively few stars. Our perspective is from within a large 
disk of stars. 

2. Because we are inside the disk of the Galaxy, it is hard to determine what it looks like. Dust 
clouds obscure most features that are distant. In many directions, the disk looks pretty much 
the same. 

3. Spiral nebulae were observed by astronomers of the last century as cloudy patches of light 
that had a spiral shape, in some cases. With the advent of photography, this description was 
only better defined but not understood. At one time early this century they were thought to 
be swirling regions of star formation. When finally resolved into stars, these nebulae were 
discovered to be galaxies like our own. 

4. The globular clusters are found in the halo of the Galaxy. But because the clusters’ motions 
take them close to the galactic center and then back out into the halo, many clusters are 
found within the galactic bulge. 

5. Cepheids have the unique property of a relationship between their period of pulsation and 
their luminosity. By observing the Cepheid and determining its period of variation, its true 
luminosity is known. Comparing the true luminosity with the apparent luminosity allows 
the distance to be determined. 

6. Because of their intrinsically high luminosity, Cepheids can be seen, and therefore used, out 
to a few million parsecs. They are used to determine distances to the nearest galaxies. 
 
7. RR Lyrae variables are very useful for determining distances to globular clusters. By 
knowing how the globular clusters are distributed in the Galaxy, the halo is mapped out. But 
most importantly, the distribution of globular clusters gives the distance to the center of the 
Galaxy from the Sun. This also helped tell astronomers how large the Milky Way actually 
is. 

8. In the radio part of the spectrum, atomic hydrogen gas emits 21-cm radiation. Because its 
long wavelength allows it to travel throughout the Galaxy, astronomers can use it to map the 
structure of gas clouds in the Galaxy. Molecular hydrogen is very difficult to observe, but 
other molecules, such as carbon monoxide, are used to map molecular clouds. 

9. The stars in the Galactic disk move in roughly circular orbits around the center of the 
Galaxy. The orbits all lie in the plane of the disk. The halo stars have approximately the 
same velocities as the disk stars but are moving in various directions, relative to the disk, 
forming a spherical halo around the Galaxy. These stars pass in and out of the disk, towards 
the center of the Galaxy and back out again into the halo. When seen locally, they appear to 
have high velocities relative to the Sun and other disk stars and the direction of their motion 
is at an angle to the plane of the disk. 

10. Radio observations of objects in the Galaxy reveal its spiral shape. Radio waves travel 
unhindered through dust clouds and so the entire Galaxy can be mapped. 

11. The spiral arms of a galaxy are bright and contain very luminous stars, open star clusters, 
and emission nebulae. All of these objects are found in star formation regions and are all 
considered young objects. 

12. The gas and dust enter the spiral arm from behind and become compressed as they encounter 
the density wave. Star formation starts from the compressed gas and dust. The stars and 
unused gas and dust move on through the spiral arm and continue with their normal orbital 
motion around the Galaxy. 

13. Imagine a group of newly formed massive stars somewhere in the galactic disk. When these 
stars form, the H II regions, or emission nebulae, that appear around them send shock waves 
through the surrounding gas. These waves can trigger new star formation. Similarly, when 
the stars explode in supernovae, more shock waves are formed. The formation of one group 
of stars provides the mechanism for the formation of more stars. 

14. The stars in the halo have orbits that form a spherical halo around the Galaxy. This tells us 
the original shape of the cloud of gas that was the galaxy before stars formed. The entire 
halo appears to rotate, which further tells us that this cloud was rotating. The formation of a 
disk is the result of the cloud having some initial rotation. 

15. Different parts of the Galaxy rotate at different rates. The rotation is actually the motions of 
the stars and gas around the Galaxy. Because the Galaxy is not a solid body, like the Earth, 
different parts of it move at different rates. The orbital motions are determined strictly by 
the amount of mass interior to the orbit. The velocity of the orbits at differing distances 
gives us the rotation curve of the Galaxy. By looking at the outermost orbits, the total mass 
of the Galaxy can be determined. 

16. The rotation curve for the Galaxy provides strong evidence for dark matter. By studying the 
motion of stars around the Galaxy, the mass interior to their orbits can be determined. 
However, more mass is found, by about a factor of 2, than can be accounted for by ordinary 
matter. Furthermore, the Galaxy seems to be larger than previously known. The rotation 
curve of the outer part of the Galaxy continues to show greater and greater amounts of 
matter, extending out to what is know as the galactic corona. 

17. Possible explanations for dark matter makes for a long list. Some are: brown dwarfs, black 
dwarfs, black holes, WIMPS, MACHOS, ... 

18. Gravitational lensing is the bending of light by a gravitational field. If one star passes 
directly in front of another, the light of the more distant star may be bent in such a way that 
it appears to brighten. Dark matter is searched for by looking for lensing of background 
stars by foreground objects that may be too dark for detection. 

19. The central regions of the Galaxy are obscured by thick clouds of interstellar dust. Visible 
light cannot penetrate these clouds. However, infrared and especially radio waves can easily 
penetrate these clouds and so we can see the center of the Galaxy at these wavelengths. 

20. From a disk of hot gas spanning 10 pc across the center of the Galaxy, infrared spectral lines 
are broadened, indicating the motion of the gas. For this motion to be possible, there must 
be a massive central mass. Radio observations also aid in examining the Galactic center, 
particularly the clouds of gas that are moving around the center. 

 
Conceptual Self-Test 

1. T 
2. F 
3. F 
4. T 
5. T 
6. F 
7. F 
8. F 
9. F 
10. T 
11. D 
12. D 
13. D 
14. B 
15. B 
16. C 
17. A 
18. B 
19. D 
20. C 
