
AT 7th Ed.
Ch. 2 Homework
Assigned:  R&D 1,2,4,5,7-10
           M-C 1-7
(Other answers are also be shown for completeness.)

1.  The Chinese contributed a calendar and records of 
  celestial events like comets and novae which are still used today.
  The Islamic culture built on the Almagest by Ptolemy during
  the dark ages.  They gave most stars the names we use today.
  They established trigonometric and algebraic methods important
  in astronomy.
2.  The geocentric model has the Earth at rest at the center 
  with the Sun and Moon orbitting it. The inferior planets moved on
  epicycles which were centered on a bar between the Earth and
  the Sun.  The superior planets were also modelled as moving on 
  epicycles which moved on deferents, but the deferents were
  beyond the Sun.  The stars were on the most distant "sphere".
3. I consider its basic flaw to be the fact that the Earth
  is fixed at the center.  It is also complex, but that is not so
  much a flaw as an undesireable quality.
4. Copernicus brought back the heliocentric system.  It was
  still flawed in that it insisted on circular motions.
5. A theory in its weakest definition is just a hypothesis. 
   For its stronger definition, it is a set of related ideas 
   which describe a large collection of observations.
   A theory cannot be proved to be true, only disproved.
7. The Copernican Principle is, most generally, that we are
   not special.  Originally, this meant that the Earth is not
   at the center of the solar system.  Since then it has been
   extended to include our Galaxy, our local group of galaxies,
   our local supercluster, and the universe.  It is also cited
   when considering life in the universe - we may not be the 
   only place with life or even intelligent life.
8. The gibbous phase of Venus disproved the Ptolemaic model.
   The presence of moons orbitting Jupiter showed that not
   all objects circled the Earth.
   The sunspots showed that the Sun was marred and imperfect.
9.  First Law: the orbits of planets are in the shape of an ellipse
   with the Sun at one focus.  Second Law: a line connecting the
   Sun and a planet sweeps out equal areas in equal time intervals.
   Third Law: the square of the orbital period is proportional
   to the cube of the semi-major axis.
10.  Tycho made meticulous observations of the positions of
   planets over many years.  Kepler then analyzed this data
   and determined the true orbits of the planets around the Sun.
11.  When Venus is near inferior conjunction, it is possible to
   bounce radar waves off of it and measure the time for radar
   to make the trip to Venus and back to Earth.  The relative 
   size (0.7 AU) and shape of Venus's orbit were known, so the 
   distance to Venus during inferior conjunction (about 28 million 
   miles) could be used to calculate the AU.  For example, 
   1 AU * 0.3 = 28 million miles gives 1 AU = 93 million miles.  
12. Astronomers used triangulation of Venus as it transitted the 
   Sun.  By finding the distance to Venus during transit, they 
   could find the sizes of Venus' orbit.  Since Venus'
   orbit had to be about 0.7 AU in radius (in order to explain 
   the maximum elongations of Venus), they could derive the size 
   of the AU.
13. Kepler's laws are empirical because they were based on
   analysis of observational data.  They are descriptive laws
   which don't explain why the planets move as they do.
14.  1st law:  every body continues in a state of rest or in 
   uniform motion in a straight line unless it experiences
   some net force.  2nd law: when a force F acts on a body
   of mass m it causes the body to accelerate at a rate a=F/m
   3rd law: for every force there is an equal but opposite
   force.
15. The two modification by Newton to Kepler's laws:
   1) For the first law, one focus of each elliptical orbit
      was located at the center-of-mass of the solar system
      rather than on the Sun itself.
   2) For the 3rd law, the mass of the system should be
      taken into account to make it more widely applicable ...
	 P^2 = R^3/M_tot
16.  The Earth moves in response to the baseball but its motion
    is not noticeable because it is so slight.  Since Newton's
    2nd law states that an object's acceleration is inversely
    proportional to its mass (a=F/m), the smaller mass will
    accelerate more for a given force.
18. When the force of gravity pulls an object toward the Earth,
    the object is said to be "falling".  The Moon is being
    pulled continuously toward the Earth by gravity, sometimes
    it moves towards Earth and sometimes it moves away, but 
    continuously falling.
20. If the Sun's gravity suddenly stopped, Earth would continue
    at its current velocity but in a straight line path.  The
    gravitational pull between the Earth and Sun is what causes
    the curved, elliptical orbit of the Earth.

Mult Choice
1. a
2. d
3. b
4. c
5. c
6. a
7. c
8. b
9. c
10. a
