
Stellar and Galactic Astronomy

Homework on stellar evolution
Ch. 18 RD 7,15
Ch. 19 RD 2,3,4,10,16,19
Ch. 20 RD 1,3,11,12,18
Ch. 21 RD 1

Ch. 18
7. What is an emission nebula?
 	An emission nebula is a region of hot glowing gas (mostly 
	hydrogen) surrounding a newly formed star or group of 
	stars.  The atoms of the gas absorbUV light emitted by the 
	bright young stars, and in return, they emit a variety
	of emission lines characteristic of the elements in
	the cloud.  One of the brightest hydrogen emission lines
	is H-alpha, which has a red color.  It is so strong that
	it often overwhelms all other emissions and colors that
	might be seen.

15. How does a molecular cloud differ from other interstellar
    matter?
        Molecular clouds are colder and denser than other phases
        of the ISM, but mostly they are distinguished by the
        presence of molecules (especially molecular hydrogen, H_2).

---------------------------
Ch. 19

2.  What is the role of heat in the process of stellar birth?
	The temp of the gas must be initially low enough so that
	the gravity can overcome the individual speeds of gas
	molecules, and collapse the cloud.  Initially, the cloud
	radiates away its gravitational energy and does not change
	temp much.  However, as the cloud gets smaller and denser
	radiation connot escape so easily and the interior of the
	cloud starts to heat up.  Slowly at first, then with
	increasing speed, internal pressure builds and pushes against
	gravity and slows the collapse of the protostar.  Eventually
	the center of the protostar will become hot and dense enough
	for fusion to occur.

3.  What is the role of rotation in the process of stellar birth?
	As an interstellar cloud collapses, it must spin faster as 
	it conserves angular momentum.  This can actually
	hinder star formation, as the rotation wants to fling material out
	of the cloud, opposing gravity.  Thus, a rotating cloud needs a 
	stronger gravitational pull an dmore mass to collapse than a
	cloud that is spinning slowly or not at all.  Rapid spin also
	causes the cloud to flatten into a disk.  Although most of
	the mass is still concentrated in the center, the material in
	the disk could form into planets.

4. What is the role of magnetism in the process of stellar birth?
	As the collapsing cloud gets heated it gets progressively more
	ionized.  Ionized gas is deflected by magnetic field lines
	so that it can move more easily along field lines than across
	them.  This means that collapse is slowed down except in
	the direction parallel to the field lines.  This also influences
	the shape of the cloud.

10. What are T Tauri stars?
	A T-Tauri star is a protostar that has heated up to the point 
	in which extreme activity on the surface generates a powerful
	"protostellar wind".  These winds can drive away material in
	the outer portions of the cloud.

16. Compare the times necessary for the various stages in the formation
    of a star like the Sun.  Why are some so short and others long?
    	The times are very short during the early stages because there is
    	little pressure support of the gas and so the gas is almost in
    	free fall.  In later stages, the gas is denser and hotter and
        so pressure slows gravitational collapse more.

19.  How can we tell whether a star cluster is young or old?
	If it contains blue, hot stars it must be young.  The age
	can be determined more precisely by plotting the stars  on
	an H-R diagram and looking for the turn-off point.

---------------------------
Ch. 20

1. Why don't stars live forever?  Which types of stars live the
   longest?
	Because they have a limited supply of "fuel" for the fusion
	processes in their cores.  The low mass stars live the longest,
	even though they have less fuel, because they burn their fuel
	at such a slow rate.

3. How long can a star like the Sun keep buring hydrogen in its core?
	About 10 billion years.

11. How do the late evolutionary stages of high-mass stars differ
    from those of low-mass stars?
	Their tracks on the H-R diagram are more horizontal (zig-zagging
	to the right), while low mass stars move primarily upward.
        Also, the high-mass stars go through more types of fusion in
	their cores than low-mass stars, and many of those types of fusion
        can happen simultaneously because of the shell-burning that occurs.
	More specifically, low-mass stars fuse H to He and He to Carbon but
	cannot fuse carbon.  High-mass stars can fuse carbon into oxygen
	and also create Neon, Silicon and iron.

12. What is the internal structure of a star on the asymptotic
    giant branch?
        A star on the asymptotic giant branch has a carbon
        core and is fusing Helium into carbon in a shell.  (Above
        that He shell would be the usual H and Helium.)

18. How can astronomers measure the age of a star cluster?
	They can plot the stars on an H-R diagram and look for
	the turn-off point.  This point is highest mass star which
	is still on the main sequence.  Theory can tell us the
	age of a star of that mass, and that age will be the age of 
        the entire cluster.

---------------------------
Ch. 21
1. Under what circumstances will a binary star produce a nova?
	If the binary contains a white dwarf star and another larger
	star, a nove could occur. The large star must be close enough
        to the w.d. so that its outer atmosphere will sometimes get 
        pulled onto the w.d..  When that material hits the w.d., it 
        heats and gives off extra light.

