Presentation questions for the Final Exam

 - Modified slightly by Dr. Pinkney

---------------------------------------------------------
Nicole B. on Dark Energy:

1) Which is NOT a way that astronomers studied dark energy or
dark matter and the expansion of the universe?
A) Type Ia Supernova
B) Sound waves (Baryonic Acoustic Oscillations)
C) Gamma rays
D) Light Distortions (gravitational lensing)
E) All are ways to study dark energy/dark matter

   Answer: E  
   I rephrased the question and choices B and D slightly.
   "Type Ia SN" (A) provided the first evidence for dark energy in 1998.
   "Sound waves" (B) are referred to as "Baryonic Acoustic Oscillations" by
   astrophysicists.  They are observed by mapping the Cosmic Microwave
   Background.  The power spectrum of this map constrains cosmological
   models including the amount of dark energy and dark matter in the
   universe.
   "gamma rays" (C) is *almost* the best answer.  They don't provide much
   direct information on the expansion of the universe or dark energy.
   However, they have been detected near the center of the Milky Way and
   Andromeda galaxies and were possibly produced by dark matter.
   (Some forms of dark matter can be involved in particle-antiparticle
   annihilation which produces gamma rays.)
   "Light distortions" refers to gravitational lensing.  There are
   different types of gravitational lensing (weak, strong, micro-).  
   The weak lensing of background galaxies by foreground clusters of 
   galaxies has given us the greatest insight into dark matter by
   showing us the total matter present. 


2) Why do astronomers use the Type Ia Supernovae to 
study the expansion of the universe?
A) They are extremely luminous explosions
B) Their apparent brightness is always the same
C) The reaction is the same thus the luminosity is always the same
D) They are very close to Earth so observations are relatively easy
E) Both A and C
   
    Answer: E

    Yes, Type Ia's are a very good "standard candle".  Type II's do
    not involve a white dwarf at the Chandrasehkar limit (1.4M_sun)
    and so they are not quite as consistent with their peak luminosity.
    Quasars are also luminous nuclei of galaxies but they are
    not as good of a standard candle as Type Ia's because of random
    beaming angles.  In contrast, Type Ia's are fairly isotropic in 
    their output.  In choice C "The reaction is the same" refers to
    the way all Type I's are a runaway thermonuclear reaction (fusion
    of C and O) taking place in a ~1.44 M_sun white dwarf.

--------------------------------------------------------
Justin Chapman on Pseudobulges:

1. True or False: The Milky Way hosts a pseudobulge.

  Ans: T
  Pseudobulges are associated with bars and the MW has a bar.
  Bars drive inflows of gas which can form additional stars in
  the inner part of the galaxy.  This is probably the main 
  mechanism for building pseudobulges, hence the "association".
  Our bulge appears a bit flattened from our perspective, which
  is a characteristic of pseudobulges.  It also has a net 
  rotation, as would be expected if it was built out of a
  rotating bar.

2. Compared to classical bulges, pseudobulges have
  a) a higher rate of star formation
  b) a lower rate of star formation
  c) the same rate of star formation
  d) no star formation

  Ans: A
  I've changed "stellar formation" to "star formation" since it is
  shorter and it's what astronomers say. "Stellar" goes with "evolution".
  "SFR" stands for "Star Formation Rate".

---------------------------------------------------------
Anthony DeNoi on Planet IX:

1) What is the perihelion (r_p) and semi-major axis (a) requirement in 
   order for an object to be considered a sednoid ?

  A) r_p > 30AU and a > 50AU
  B) r_p > 50AU and a > 100AU
  C) r_p > 50AU and a > 150AU
  D) r_p > 60AU and a > 100AU
  E) There's no such thing as a sednoid
     Answer: C
     The Perihelion must be > 50 AU and the semi-major axis (SM) 
     is > 150 AU
     The choices used to look like:
     "P: >30AU and SM: >50AU" but I like "a" for semi-major axis
     and "P" looked like period.

2) __________ is the fraction of incident solar radiation on an
   object which is diffusely reflected.
Original question:
2) __________ is the measure of diffused reflection of solar
   radiation based on the total solar radiation it encounters.

     Answer: albedo
   The original question seems to use a definition given by Wikipedia, 
   which I don't like.  A simpler definition of albedo is the fraction 
   of incident light that is reflected from a surface.  Requiring "solar" 
   radiation helps standardize the quantity since reflectance can depend on
   the light source's color.   Specifying "diffuse" is referring to the 
   way reflection can be either diffuse (in all directions) or specular 
  (obeying the law of reflection).  Diffuse reflection contributes more 
   to the brightness of an object than specular reflection. (A polished 
   metal sphere will have only specular reflection and will not look as
   bright as a sphere painted, say, matte white or even grey. The polished
   sphere would contain a virtual image of the light source with a
   magnificatio <1.)

---------------------------------------------------------

Brandon E. on Hubble Constant:

1) T or F: The two methods for determining the Hubble constant 
are cosmic gamma radiation and spectroscopic observations at known 
distances.
    Answer: F
     False because of the word "gamma".  Cosmic *microwave* radiation
     can however be used to determine Ho.  Even if the word "microwave"
     was used, those who work in the field would probably still say "False"
     because there are so many myriad methods and some don't fall cleanly
     into one of these two bins.  For example, one method uses the 
     Sunyaev-Zel'dovich effect (SZE), which is a temperature change of 
     the CMB caused by the microwave photons passing
     through a hot cluster of galaxies.  One needs to measure the 
     redshift of the cluster, its x-rays and the CMB to apply
     the method.  So it doesn't really fall into one of the 
     original categories, it falls into both.  

2) The Hubble constant derived from spectroscopic observations 
is ______ that derived using CMB.
  A) Higher than
  B) Lower than
  C) The same as
    Answer:  A 
    The Hubble constant is around 73 km/s/Mpc using galaxies and 
    supernovae, while the CMB gives Ho ~ 68 km/s/Mpc
         
---------------------------------------------------------

Claire G. on IceCube

1) True or False: Neutrinos are the most abundant particle in the
   universe
    Answer: F   
   Photons were most abundant. Neutrinos were claimed to be 2nd most 
   abundant, but we don't yet know what constitutes dark matter and 
   dark energy which make up most of the mass-energy of the 
   universe, so it is risky to say neutrinos are the 2nd most
   abundent.  It is probably the neutrino specialists that say
   this the most.  There is a similar trend (which you may have
   heard in our own physics department) in which plasma 
   physicists claim that over 99% of the universe is a plasma.
   Well, the universe contains much more dark matter than baryonic
   matter, and dark matter cannot be a plasma, so the statement
   is clearly wrong.  It is even arguable that the baryonic
   matter of the universe is <99% plasma.  For example, in Milky-Way
   like galaxies, the mass in cold gas is 10% of the star mass.

2) Which of the following is not an application of neutrino
   observations?

  a) Locate black holes
  b) Early detection of supernovas
  c) Locate new galaxies
  d) Look for Lorentz violations
    Answer: C  (locate new galaxies)
  The original question was "Which of the following do we NOT use 
  neutrinos to do?"
  "Locate black holes" is a great application of high energy
  neutrino observations which can determine a direction to the
  source (e.g., IceCube).  Black holes themselves do not produce
  the neutrinos, but their accretion disks can create a jet of
  relativistic particles which can then interact and decay into
  neutrinos which will be high energy because their parent particles
  were high energy.

---------------------------------------------------------

Tyler Kennedy on Kepler's Legacy:

1) The Kepler telescope uses which of these methods that observe the
   dips in brightness as a  planet passes in front of it?

  A)  Doppler method
  B)  Transit method
  C)  Orbit method
  D)  Kepler method
  Ans: B
  The "Transit method" requires high precision photometry of all 
  of the stars in a large field of view detector.  The decrease
  in brightness of the star is usually <<1%. 
  The "Orbit method" is not really a thing, nor is the "Kepler method".
  But the "Doppler method" describes a real approach to finding
  exoplanets which involves high precision spectroscopy of the
  parent star to detect its wobble due to the pull of the planet.

2) T or F.  The observations found from the Kepler telescope
  suggest that there are more planets than stars in the galaxy.
  Ans: T
  Would this also imply that the average number of planets per
  star found by kepler is greater than 1?  No, because in order
  to detect a transit the planet has to have an orbital plane
  viewed very close to edge on.  So they have to do a statistical
  correction, assuming randomly inclined planet orbits, to infer 
  that many stars with no dimming must also have planets.

--------------------------------------------------------------

Alex Lutheran:

1. What type of black holes have been securely detected in the centers 
of galaxies?
  A) Primordial Black Holes
  B) Stellar Black Holes
  C) Intermediate Black Holes
  D) Supermassive Black Holes
  Ans: D
  The original question was "What type of black holes are found at the
  center of galaxies?".  But there is circumstantial evidence that
  stellar black holes are found at the centers of galaxies (because
  supernovae remnants are found in them). Also, IMBH candidates have been
  found in X-ray data for the centers of galaxies like M82 and IC342.  If
  primoridial BH or mini-BH exist, they may also be at the
  centers of galaxies.  So I wanted to make choice D stand out
  as the correct one.

2. T or F : Stellar dynamics is a useful way to determine Black Hole 
  Masses in galaxies with A LOT of dust.
  Ans: F  
  Dust interferes with stellar kinematics partly because it blocks
  star light from behind the dust blobs (modeling assumes that you
  are adding up light equally from the close and far sides of an 
  axisymmetric galaxy).  Also, dust is accompanied by gas whose
  emission lines can overlap and even coincide with the absorption 
  lines that are used to obtain the stellar kinematics.  Stellar
  kinematics require precise knowledge of absorption line shapes.

--------------------------------------------------------------

Nathan McCutcheon

1. What type of gravitational waves have astrophysicists detected
  with LIGO and VIRGO?
  a) Burst Gravitational Waves
  b) Stochastic Gravitational Waves
  c) Continuous Gravitational Waves
  d) Compact Binary Inspiral Gravitational Waves
  ANS: D
I only changed the spelling of "astrophysisist". :)
All of the choices are actual, theoretical phenomena.

2. T or F: Gravitational waves from a neutron star merger lost
  intensity as expected for a 3+1 dimensional universe.
  ANS: T
This refers to the one GW detection (so far) of a neutron
star merger.

--------------------------------------------------------------

Matt Sibila on Dark Matter free dwarfs

1. T or F: Dwarf spheroidal galaxies tend to have a smaller 
  mass-to-light ratio than the Milky Way.
  ANS: F
The original question was "Dwarf galaxies tend to have a smaller 
Mhalo/Mstars than the Milky Way".  The Van Dokkum paper about
N1052-DF2 used "M_halo/M_stars", so this is excusable, but 
astronomers generally prefer "mass to light ratio" (M/L) when 
addressing both stellar populations and the amount of dark matter 
in galaxies or clusters of galaxies.  "Mhalo" suggests the mass 
of the halo, which includes stars, and so confuses the issue.
As Table 24.1 shows, the "stellar halo" is referring to just the 
stellar portion (of the MW) while a separate column is for 
"dark matter halo".  
So "M_halo" is supposed to mean the dark matter component, but 
I think it was a bad choice by van Dokkum.  They are also using
"M_stars/M_halo" in some of their work, to further confuse.  
More about M/L:
Chapter 24 gives the M/L_B for the bulge and thin disk of the 
Milky Way, both M/L~3.  Tables 25.3 and 25.4 gives M/L for
6 types of ellipticals, including 3 types of dwarfs.  The
highest is for dwarf spheroidals (dSph) with M/L=5-100.
N1052-DF2 is none of these 6 types, it is an Ultra Diffuse
Galaxy (UDG), much larger than dSph's, but also expected to 
have large amounts of DM.  A famous example of a UDG is
dragonfly-44 with an M/L_I ~ 40 - it has the same mass as MW 
but 1/100 the luminosity.


2. Which dwarf galaxy was found to have little dark matter?
  A) NGC1052
  B) NGC1052-DF2
  C) M82
  D) Large Magellanic Cloud
   ANS: B

--------------------------------------------------------------

Peter Smith

1. What is the minimum length a semi-major axis is required for
something to be considered a trans-Neptunian object (in AU)?
  a. 39.6 AU (Pluto's semi-major axis)
  b. 30.1 AU
  c. 43.704 AU (Albions semi-major axis)
  d. 45.7 AU (Makemakes semi-major axis)
  ANS: B
30.1 AU refers to the orbit of Neptune.

2. What is the area called where many TNO's exist and describe
it's characteristics.
   ANS: The Kuiper belt is a region filled with many small icy bodies. 
It ranges from 30 AU to 100 AU and is home to many dwarf planets.

Problem: there are definitely trends within the 30-100 AU 
region begging for subdivisions into classes.  So the "classical
kuiper belt" has been defined to include only R<50 AU.
Beyond 50, you have Sednoids, "scattered disk" and "detached
population" objects.

I think I would prefer:

2. What is the area called where TNO's have orbital periods
between that of Pluto and twice that of Neptune?
   ANS: the classical Kuiper Belt.

A plot of eccentricity vs semi-major axis shows a clump of
objects at R=39 AU which have a 3:2 resonance with Neptune.
Pluto is included in this group and so they are called "Plutinos".
Between 40 and 48 AU, there is a dense clump of points which
is the classical Kuiper Belt.  (These are divided into two
groups, the hot and cold KBOs, where the cold ones
have low orbital inclinations.)
